Aaron_M_Kahn_The_Oxford_Handbook_of_Cervantes_2021,_Oxford_University.epub

The Oxford Handbook of
Cervantes
The Oxford Handbook of
Cervantes
Edited by
Aaron M. Kahn
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, ox2 6dp, United Kingdom
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It furthers the
University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education by publishing
worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press in the UK and in
certain other countries
© Oxford University Press, 2021
The moral rights of the authors have been asserted
First Edition published in 2021
Impression: 1
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior permission in
writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted by law, by licence or under
terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning
reproduction outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,
Oxford University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this work in any other form and you must impose this same
condition on any acquirer
Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Control Number: 2020944180
ISBN 978–0–19–874291–3
ebook ISBN 978–0–19–106058–8
Printed and bound in the UK by TJ Books Limited
Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and for information
only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials contained in any third party
website referenced in this work.
In loving memory of
Jude del Pozo Bauer.
In your three short years, you were such a force of wonder and love
that you left a lasting impression on all who met you.
‘God brings His children to heaven by many paths.’ Don Quixote
(I.8)
Table of Contents
Notes on Contributors
Note on Translations
List of Cervantes’s Works
Introduction
Aaron M. Kahn
Section 1: Biography
1. Cervantes’s Life
Jean Canavaggio
2. Cervantes and Warfare
Stacey Triplette
3. Cervantes and Empire
Frederick A. de Armas
4. Captivity in Cervantes
María Antonia Garcés
Section 2: Don Quixote De La Mancha
5. Don Quixote, Part I (1605)
Edwin Williamson
6. Don Quixote, Part II (1615)
Edwin Williamson
7. Quixote and Counter-Quixote: The Cervantes-Avellaneda
Duel and Its Impact on the History of the Novel
James Iffland
8. Don Quixote de la Mancha’s Narrative Structure within the
Literary Tradition
Yolanda Iglesias
9. Don Quixote: Humour in Philosophy and Philosophy in
Humour
Donald Palmer
Section 3: Cervantes’s Prose
10. ‘para empresas más altas y de mayor importancia’: The rota
Virgilii and the Orphic Poet in Miguel de Cervantes’s La Galatea
(1585)
Benjamin J. Nelson
11. Novelas ejemplares (1613)
Barry Ife
12. Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda: historia setentrional
(1617)
Michael Armstrong-Roche
13. Cervantes and Madness
Rachel N. Bauer
14. Cervantes and Genre
Brian Brewer
Section 4: Cervantes the Dramatist
15. First Writings for the Stage (1580s): Pre-Lopean Successes
and Failures
David G. Burton
16. Ocho comedias (1615)
Melanie S. Henry
17. The Ignominies of Persuasion in Cervantes’s Entremeses
(1615): An Overview of Cervantine Farce
Carolyn Lukens-Olson
18. Cervantes and the comedia nueva
Moisés R. Castillo
19. Versification in Cervantes’s Drama
Kathleen Jeffs
Section 5: Cervantes’s Poetry and Other Writings
20. Cervantine Poetry: History and Context
Adrienne L. Martín
21. Confessing on the Move: Viaje del Parnaso and ‘Adjunta al
Parnaso’ (1614)
Esther Fernández Rodríguez
22. Attributions and Lost and Promised Works
Aaron M. Kahn
Section 6: Sources, Influences, and
Contemporaries
23. Cervantes’s Sources and Influences
Stacey Triplette
24. Cervantes and Lope de Vega
Jonathan Thacker
25. Cervantes and Other Literary Circles
Victoria Ríos Castaño
26. Windmills of Reality, Giants of the Imagination: Cervantes
in British Literature
Zenón Luis-Martínez
27. Cervantes in/on the Americas
Diana de Armas Wilson
Section 7: Reception
28. Cervantes’s Biographers
Krzysztof Sliwa
29. Cervantes on Screen
Duncan Wheeler
30. Cervantine Criticism until 1999
R.J. Oakley
31. Cervantine Criticism since 2000 and into the Future
Bruce R. Burningham
Index
Notes on Contributors
Michael Armstrong-Roche is Associate Professor and former Chair of
the Department of Romance Languages and Literatures at Wesleyan
University (Connecticut, USA). He has all three degrees from Harvard,
held a National Mellon Fellowship in the Humanities (1989–94), was a
member of the Executive Council of the Cervantes Society of America
(2014–16), and is now on the editorial board of the Bulletin of the
Comediantes and the advisory board of the UK’s Arts and Humanities
Research Council (AHRC)-funded Early Modern Women’s Performance
and the Dramatic Canon Project (2018–20). He has published steadily on
Persiles, including a book called Cervantes’s Epic Novel: Empire, Religion,
and the Dream Life of Heroes in ‘Persiles’ (University of Toronto Press,
2009) and essays in Spanish, most recently for Persiles special issues
(the eHumanista Cervantes issue in 2016; the December 2017 issue of
the Revista de Occidente; and two subsequent collections (published in
2019) based on the 2017 international Persiles conferences in Norway
and Lisbon, where he was a plenary speaker). He has published on
Cervantes’s plays and is writing a book about them called Cervantes and
the Theatrical Revolution. As a long-time member of the Theater without
Borders research collaborative, he looks comparatively at how the
presence of boy actors on the English stage and of actresses on the
Spanish stage might have shaped the writing of plays on shared
sources.
Rachel N. Bauer is Assistant Professor of Spanish Literature and
Language in the Department of Modern Languages and Literatures at
Rhodes College, in Memphis, Tennessee. Her work to date has mainly
focused on the relationship between madness, laughter, and journey in
Don Quixote.
Brian Brewer is Assistant Professor and Head of the Department of
Hispanic Studies, Trinity College Dublin. His current research focuses
on the importance of early modern economic theory and political
economy in the development of Cervantes’s poetics of the novel. He has
published articles in scholarly journals including Bulletin of Spanish
Studies, Cervantes, Revista Canadiense de Estudios Hispánicos, Revista de
Estudios Hispánicos, and Revista Hispánica Moderna.
Bruce R. Burningham is Professor of Hispanic Studies and Theatre at
Illinois State University where he currently serves as Chair of the
Department of Languages, Literatures, and Cultures. Since 2011, he has
served as Editor of Cervantes, the official journal of the Cervantes
Society of America. He is also the President of the Association for
Hispanic Classical Theater (AHCT). His research and teaching interests
include medieval and early modern Spanish and Latin American
literature, Hispanic theatre, and performance theory. His publications
include two monographs and an edited volume: Tilting Cervantes:
Baroque Reflections on Postmodern Culture (Vanderbilt University Press,
2008), Radical Theatricality: Jongleuresque Performance on the Early
Spanish Stage (Purdue University Press, 2007), and Millennial Cervantes:
New Currents in Cervantes Studies (University of Nebraska Press, 2020).
He has also published articles in Theatre Journal, Cervantes, Journal of
Commonwealth 
Literature, 
Bulletin 
of 
the 
Comediantes, 
Comedia
Performance, Romance Quarterly, and eHumanista/Cervantes. He received
his PhD from Yale University, and has taught at Florida Atlantic
University and the University of Southern California. He is a recipient
of an Andrew W. Mellon Postdoctoral Fellowship and a National
Endowment for the Humanities grant. His theatrical directing credits
include a recent production of Griselda Gambaro’s The Walls.
David G. Burton is Professor Emeritus of Spanish in the Department of
Modern Languages at Ohio University (Athens, OH). For over twenty
years he led study abroad programs in Mexico and, in Athens, taught
courses in language, Hispanic theatre, Medieval Spanish literature,
historical linguistics, and Don Quijote. His scholarship includes studies
on Conde Lucanor, Celestina, and the theatre of Juan de la Cueva. He is
the author of three books: An Anthology of Medieval Spanish Prose, an
edition of the Conde Lucanor, and A Literary Companion to Don Quijote.
Current research interests include medieval Spanish hagiography,
especially the presence of St Mary Magdalen in pre-sixteenth century
Spain.
Jean Canavaggio is a professor emeritus at the University of Paris
Nanterre, and former director of the Casa de Velázquez in Madrid. He
is author of numerous articles, as well as individual and collective
books, mainly on Spanish Literature of the Golden Age. He was the
editor of a History of Spanish Literature (Fayard, 1993–1994) and of the
French translation of Cervantes’s Works in the Bibliothèque de la
Pléiade (Gallimard, 2001). Among his books, he has published
Cervantès dramaturge: un théâtre à naître (PUF, 1977), Cervantès
(Mazarine, 1986, Prix Goncourt for Biography), Cervantes entre vida y
creación (Biblioteca de Estudios Cervantinos, 2000), Un mundo
abreviado: aproximaciones al teatro áureo (Iberoamericana/Vervuert,
2000), Don Quichotte, du livre au mythe: quatre siècles d’errance (Fayard,
2005), a selection of Teresa of Avila and John of the Cross’s works
(Gallimard, Pléiade, 2012), Retornos a Cervantes (IDEA, 2014), Les
Espagnes de Mérimée (Centro de Estudios Europa Hispánica, 2016), and
he is preparing the Diccionario Cervantes, which will be published at the
end of 2020.
Moisés R. Castillo is Associate Professor of Early Modern and Colonial
Studies in the Department of Hispanic Studies at the University of
Kentucky. With a B.A. in philosophy from the University of Granada,
Spain, and an M.A. and Ph.D. in Hispanic literature from the University
of Minnesota, he currently serves as a member of the Executive Council
of the Cervantes Society of America. He is the author of Indios en
escena: La representación del amerindio en el teatro del Siglo de Oro
(Purdue University Press, 2009); guest editor of the special number of
Romance Quarterly vol. 61, no 2, 2014 devoted to Cervantes’s Exemplary
Novels; numerous chapters in volumes, and articles in refereed journals.
His research focuses on Golden Age theatre and Cervantes studies. At
present, he is writing a manuscript on the Cervantine comedias, and
preparing an edited volume in memory of John Jay Allen, forthcoming
in 2021.
Frederick A. de Armas is Andrew W. Mellon Distinguished Service
Professor in Romance Languages and Comparative Literature at the
University of Chicago, where he has also served as Chair of the
Department and is now Director of Graduate Studies. He has been
President of the Cervantes Society of America and President of
Associación Internactional Siglo de Oro (AISO). He is the author of
more than 200 essays on early modern literature. His more recent
books and collections include: Writing for the Eyes in the Spanish Golden
Age (2004); and Ekphrasis in the Age of Cervantes (2005); Quixotic
Frescoes: Cervantes and Italian Renaissance Art (2006); Hacia la tragedia
áurea (2008); Ovid in the Age of Cervantes (2010); Calderón: del
manuscrito a la escena (2011); Objects of Culture in the Literature of
Imperial Spain (2013); Nuevas sonoras aves: catorce ensayos sobre
Calderón de la Barca (2015); Las memorias de un honrado aguador:
Ámbitos de estudio en torno a la difusión de Lazarillo de Tormes. (2017);
and La astrología en el teatro clásico europeo: de Lope de Vega a
Shakespeare (2017). He is also the author of short stories and a novel
entitled El abra del Yumurí (2016). His book Don Quixote among the
Saracens: Clashes of Civilizations and Literary Genres (2011) was
recognized with honourable mention for the PROSE Award in
Literature 2011.
Esther Fernández Rodríguez is Associate Professor at Rice University.
She received her doctorate in 2005 from the University of California at
Davis and is the author of Eros en escena: Erotismo en el teatro del Siglo
de Oro (Juan de la Cuesta, 2009), editor of Don Gil de las calzas verdes
(Cervantes&Co., 
2013), 
co-editor 
of 
El 
perro 
del 
hortelano
(Cervantes&Co., 2011), in addition to co-ordinating and editing the
multi-author collaboration Diálogos en las tablas: Últimas tendencias de la
puesta en escena del teatro clásico español (Reichenberger, 2014).
Fernández’s journal articles have also principally attended to eroticism
and the Spanish comedia; visual and material culture; and performance
analysis of classical theatre’s most contemporary adaptations.
Fernández’s current work includes the co-edition of a volume that
explores Anglo-Spanish relations vis-a-vis the contentious image of
Elizabeth I in early modern Spain, The Image Of Elizabeth I Tudor In
Early Modern Spain (U of Nebraska P, 2019), the coordination of a
festschrift in honour of Adrienne L. Martín, Sex and Gender in Cervantes
(Reichenberger, 2018), as well as a new monograph entitled To Embody
the Marvelous: The Making of Illusions in Early Modern Spain (Vanderbilt
UP, 2021).
María Antonia Garcés is Professor Emerita of Hispanic Studies at
Cornell University. She obtained an M.A. from Georgetown University
in English (1987), and a Ph.D. from the Johns Hopkins University in
Golden Age Spanish Literature (1994). A specialist in Cervantes and
early modern Iberian literatures and cultures, she focuses her particular
interest on the contacts between Islam and Christianity in Spain and
the Mediterranean. In 2003, Garcés received the James Russell Lowell
Prize of the Modern Language Association of America (MLA) for her
book Cervantes in Algiers: A Captive’s Tale (Vanderbilt UP, 2002; rev.
2nd ed. 2005), a study of Cervantes’s Algerian captivity (1575–80) and
its effects on his fiction. Her own revised and expanded translation of
this study was published in Spain in 2005: Cervantes en Argel: historia de
un cautivo (Gredos). Her archival research has produced another major
project on the socio-political world of Algiers, with Professor Diana
Wilson (translator): An Early Modern Dialogue with Islam: Antonio de
Sosa’s Topography of Algiers (1612) (University of Notre Dame P,
2011). Her publications include: ‘“Alabado por sus acciones”: Maḥmud
siciliano en El amante liberal.’ Special issue Cervantes y el Mediterráneo.
Guest editors: Steven Hutchinson and Antonio Cortijo. eHumanista/
Cervantes 2 (2013): 427–61; and more recently: ‘La captivité de
Cervantès à Alger.’ In L’Algérie et l’Espagne. Des ponts à travers l’Histoire.
Ed. Rafael López Guzmán, Juan Manuel Cid, and Jerónimo Páez.
Granada: Editorial Almed, 2017. 229–38. At present, Professor Garcés
is preparing the edition of Volume 2 of this monumental work,
tentatively titled Pashas and Pirates of 16th-Century Algiers.
Melanie S. Henry ’s research focuses primarily on Cervantes’s
theatrical writings. Her book, The Signifying Self, explores Cervantes’s
representation of freedom in his Ocho comedias as a counter-perspective
to prevailing theatrical trends and early modern Spain’s dominant
ideologies. Her current research aims to extend this work across
Cervantes’s entire dramatic corpus. Melanie has also written on the
Novelas ejemplares and is particularly interested in issues of
performativity and theatricality in Cervantes’s prose. She previously
lectured at Durham University and is now based at Queen’s University
Belfast.
Barry Ife held the Cervantes Chair of Spanish at King’s College London
from 1988–2004 and was Principal of the Guildhall School of Music &
Drama from 2004 to 2017. He specialises in the cultural history of
Spain and Spanish America from the fifteenth to the eighteenth
centuries; Spanish Golden-Age poetry, fiction and drama; and Spanish
music. He has published widely on Spanish Golden-Age prose fiction
and is currently working on a book on the voice in Cervantes, together
with a variorum commentary on the keyboard sonatas of Domenico
Scarlatti. He was appointed CBE in the 2000 Queen’s Birthday Honours
for services to Hispanic Studies and received a knighthood in the 2017
New Year Honours for services to performing arts education.
James Iffland is Professor of Spanish and Latin American Studies at
Boston University. He is the author of Quevedo and the Grotesque (2
vols), De fiestas y aguafiestas: risa, locura e ideología en Cervantes y
Avellaneda, Ensayos sobre la poesía revolucionaria de Centroamérica, and
editor, or co-editor, of Quevedo in Perspective: Eleven Essays for the
Quadricentennial, El Quijote desde América, El Quijote desde América
(Segunda Parte), ‘One More Crossroads: Don Quijote at Four Hundred’
(special issue of Cervantes), and Quevedo’s La vida del buscón llamado
don Pablos. He has been an elected member of the Executive Council of
the Cervantes Society of America and currently serves as Associate
Editor of Cervantes. He has been awarded a ‘Cruz de Oficial’ of the
Orden de Isabel la Católica by the Spanish government and a Diploma
of Recognition from the Universidad de El Salvador. He is currently at
work on a book on Roque Dalton, Salvadoran writer and revolutionary,
as well as a collection of essays on what he calls the ‘social destiny’ of
Don Quixote.
Yolanda Iglesias (PhD, Boston University) is Associate Professor at the
Department of Spanish and Portuguese and at the Centre for Medieval
Studies at the University of Toronto. Her current research interests and
teaching includes Studies in Medieval Iberian Literature, La Celestina,
Alfonso X el Sabio, Siete Partidas, Cervantes, and Writing and Culture in
Early Modern Spain. She is the author of a book entitled ‘Una nueva
mirada a la parodia de la novela sentimental en La Celestina’
(Iberoamericana-Vervuert, 2009). She has publications in academic
journals such as Corónica, Cahier, Celestinesca, Revista Canadiense de
Estudios Hispánicos, Romance Quarterly, Lemir, and E-Humanista. She is
currently working on two main research projects on Las Siete Partidas,
and on money and economy in medieval literature and monasteries.
She currently serves as Associate Chair, Undergraduate Studies of the
Spanish and Portuguese Department and she has been elected as the
President of the Canadian Association of Hispanic.
Kathleen Jeffs is Associate Professor and Chair of the Theatre and
Dance Department at Gonzaga University in Spokane, Washington. She
served as dramaturg for the Royal Shakespeare Company’s Spanish
Golden Age season and completed her D.Phil. at the University of
Oxford (New College). She has lectured on Golden Age drama at Oxford
and Cambridge, and taught drama at the University of Sussex. She
served as post-doctoral research assistant on the AHRC project Out of
the Wings (www.outofthewings.org), a virtual environment geared for
theatre practitioners and educators to spark new performances of
Spanish drama in English translation. Publications include Staging the
Spanish Golden Age: Translation and Performance (Oxford University
Press, 2018) and a new translation of The Force of Habit (La fuerza de la
costumbre) by Guillén de Castro (Liverpool University Press, ed. Machit,
2019). Selected other publications appear in Metacritical Cervantes
(Juan de la Cuesta, ed. Hessel, 2018); Comedia Performance (Spring
2016); in Connecting Past and Present: Exploring the Influence of the
Spanish Golden Age in the Twentieth and Twenty-first Centuries
(Cambridge Scholars Publishing, ed. Kahn, 2015); in The Reinvention of
Theatre in Sixteenth-Century Europe (Modern Humanities Research
Association and Maney Publishing, Legenda, ed. Earle and Fouto,
2015); in Remaking the Comedia: Spanish Classical Theatre in Adaptation
(Tamesis, ed. Erdman and Paun de García, 2015); and in On Wolves and
Sheep: Exploring the Expression of Political Thought in Golden Age Spain
(Cambridge Scholars Publishing, ed. Kahn, 2011).
Aaron M. Kahn has been in post at the University of Sussex since
2008. He graduated with Magna Cum Laude honours at Ohio
University, USA (2000), and completed his DPhil in Golden Age
Spanish Literature at the University of Oxford (Linacre College) in
2005. His current teaching includes Twentieth-Century Spanish
Literature and Film, Translation, and Oral Interpreting, along with
Spanish Golden Age Literature. His publications include On Wolves and
Sheep: Exploring the Expression of Political Thought in Golden Age Spain
(Cambridge Scholars Publishing, ed. Kahn, 2011), The Ambivalence of
Imperial Discourse: Cervantes’s Numancia within the Lost Generation of
Spanish Drama (1570–90) (Peter Lang, 2008), and various articles
published in peer-reviewed journals; his 2010 article ‘Towards a Theory
of Attribution: Is La conquista de Jerusalén by Miguel de Cervantes?’ (in
Journal of European Studies), and the 2013 follow-up ‘Even Further
Towards a Theory of Attribution: Re-Visiting the Cervantine Attribution
of La conquista de Jerusalén’ (in Cervantes) contribute to the attribution
of this play the author of Don Quijote. Most recently, Kahn collaborated
on a project co-funded by Creative Europe of the European Commission
exploring theatrical recreations of Don Quixote in Europe (2017–19); he
provided the Spanish translation of The Comical History of Don Quixote
(1694) by Thomas D’Urfey (Florence: Società Editrice Fiorentina,
2019).
Zenón Luis-Martínez is Senior Lecturer of English at the University of
Huelva (Spain), where he teaches medieval and early modern
literature. He has edited Abraham Fraunce’s The Shepherds’ Logic and
Other Dialectical Writings (2016) for the Modern Humanities Research
Association (MHRA) Critical Texts Series. He is the author of In Words
and Deeds: The Spectacle of Incest in English Renaissance Tragedy
(Amsterdam: Rodopi, 2002). He has published articles and book
chapters on English Renaissance and Restoration literature, as well as
early modern Anglo-Spanish literary relations (particularly Shakespeare
and Cervantes). He has also coedited several collections, among them,
with Luis Gómez Canseco, Between Shakespeare and Cervantes: Trails
along the Renaissance (Newark, NJ: Juan de la Cuesta, 2006), and, with
Sonia Hernández-Santano, the special issue Poetry, the Arts of Discourse
and the Discourse of the Arts: Rethinking Renaissance Poetic Theory and
Practice for Parergon (the Journal of the Australian and New Zealand
Association for Medieval and Early Modern Studies). His current
project is a critical edition of George Chapman’s early poetry for the
MHRA Critical Texts Series. Since May 2018 he has been President of
the Spanish and Portuguese Society for English Renaissance Studies
(SEDERI).
Carolyn Lukens-Olson is Professor of Spanish in the Department of
Modern Languages and Literature at Saint Michael’s College, Vermont
(USA). Her degrees are from Ohio University and the University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, where she completed her Doctorate in
Romance Languages. Her primary areas of research are Cervantes and
Renaissance rhetoric. Her related publications include an edition of
Cervantes Los entremeses as well as articles in the Anuario de Estudios
Cervantinos, the Journal of the Association of Core Texts and Curricula,
and the Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America.
Adrienne L. Martín received a Ph.D. in Romance Languages and
Literatures from Harvard University. She is Professor Emerita of Golden
Age Spanish Literature at the University of California, Davis, where she
also served as Vice Provost, Global Affairs. She is former President of
the Cervantes Society of America and of the Society for Renaissance
and Baroque Hispanic Poetry. She has published on all genres of
Golden Age Literature and a wide range of topics, including Cervantes,
Góngora, humor, sexuality, eroticism, women’s lyric, and animal
studies. She is the author of Cervantes and the Burlesque Sonnet (U.
California P, 1991) and An Erotic Philology of Golden Age Spain
(Vanderbilt UP, 2008), guest editor of a special issue of the journal
Calíope 12.2 (2006) on erotic poetry, and co-editor of two anthologies
of essays on erotic literature: Venus venerada: Tradiciones eróticas de la
literatura española (Ed. Complutense 2006); and Venus venerada II:
Literatura erótica y modernidad en España (Ed. Complutense 2007); as
well as Lives and Works of Early Modern Women in Iberia and the
Americas: Studies in Law, Society, Art, and Literature (Artepoética Press,
2014). She is currently writing a book about animals in the works of
Cervantes.
Benjamin J. Nelson is an associate professor of Spanish at the
University of South Carolina Beaufort, where he is currently the
program coordinator of the Spanish Degree Program and Chair of the
Faculty Senate. He earned his doctorate degree from the University of
Chicago. He has published in various journals and edited collections on
the Spanish pastoral, including Juan de Encina’s attempts to court
patronage in his eclogues, the use of Ovid to garner fame in sixteenth-
century poetry and prose, and the suicidal tendencies of shepherds and
shepherdesses within seventeenth-century libros de pastores. His most
recent publication is co-editing and contributing an essay about Jorge
de Montemayor’s La Diana to: ‘Los cielos se agotaron de prodigios’: Essays
in Honor of Frederick A. de Armas. From 2008 to 2010, he also served as
the president of the Early Modern and Image and Text Society (EMIT).
He is currently working on the presence and use of body parts within El
Quijote.
R.J. Oakley taught Spanish and Luso-Brazilian language and literature
at the University of Birmingham until retirement in 2002. He has
written widely on medieval and early modern Spanish and Portuguese
literature. In addition to essays on the picaresque and Golden Age
drama, principally Tirso, he collaborated with D.W. Lomax in
translation 
with 
critical 
commentary 
of 
the 
fifteenth-century
Portuguese chronicle of Fernão Lopes. Since retirement, he has been
able to take up visiting fellowships awarded by the Brazilian Ministry
of Education and Culture to deliver postgraduate courses in
comparative literature at the State Universities of São Paulo (2004–5)
and Paraná (2009). His latest book is Lima Barreto e o destino da
literatura (São Paulo State University Press, 2011).
Donald Palmer received his Bachelor’s and Master’s degrees at the
Univ. of California, Berkeley and his Doctorate of Philosophy and
Letters at the University of Navarra in Pamplona, Spain. He has
published a number of philosophy books, including Looking at
Philosophy, Does the Center Hold?, Why It’s Hard to Be Good (McGraw-
Hill), and, more popularly, Kierkegaard for Beginners, Sartre for
Beginners, and Structuralism and Post-Structuralism for Beginners. He
taught for many years at the College of Marin, in California, and
finished his teaching career at North Carolina State University. He and
his wife divide their time among North Carolina, the San Francisco Bay
Area, and the Lot Valley in Southwestern France.
Victoria Ríos Castaño is lecturer in Spanish at Coventry University
(UK). She received her BA and Master’s degrees from the University of
Salamanca, and her Doctorate in Colonial Latin American Literature
and in Contemporary Latin American Literature from the University of
Nottingham and the Sorbonne University, respectively. She is the
author of Translation as Conquest: Sahagún and Universal History of the
Things of New Spain (Iberoamericana Vervuert, 2014) and guest editor
of special issues of Les Ateliers du Séminaire Amérique Latine and
Colloquia (online journals of the Department of Latin American Studies,
Sorbonne). She has published several book chapters and peer-refereed
articles on cultural translation and colonial Mexico in journals such as
The Americas, Target: International Journal of Translation, and Bulletin of
Latin American Research. She is currently working on a monograph on
Julio Cortázar and his relationship with literary agents, translators, and
critics.
Krzysztof Sliwa is Professor at Universidad del Atlántico, Barranquilla,
Colombia, Cervantine biographer, documentalist, and author of 12
books: Bibliografía de Vida ejemplar y heroica de Miguel de Cervantes
Saavedra, de Luis Astrana Marín (Juan de la Cuesta, 2010); Cartas,
documentos y escrituras de Pedro Calderón de la Barca Henao de la Barrera
Riaño, Fénix de los ingenios y lucero mayor de la poesía española (1600–
1681) y de sus familiares (Parnaseo, 2008); Cartas, documentos y
escrituras del Dr Frey Lope Félix de Vega Carpio (1562–1635), (Juan de la
Cuesta, 2007); Vida de Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra (Edition
Reichenberger, 2006); Cartas, documentos y escrituras de Garcilaso de la
Vega (1499–1536) y de sus familiares (Centro de Estudios cervantinos,
2006); Cartas, documentos y escrituras de Francisco Gómez de Quevedo y
Villegas (1580–1645), caballero de la Orden de Santiago, señor de la villa
de la Torre de Juan Abad y de sus parientes (Universidad de Navarra,
2006); Documentos de Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra y de sus familiares
(Texas A&M University, 2005); Cartas, documentos y escrituras de Luis de
Góngora y Argote (1561–1627) y de sus parientes (Universidad de
Córdoba, 2004); El licenciado Juan de Cervantes. Efemérides del licenciado
Juan de Cervantes. Documentos y datos para una biografía del abuelo
paterno del autor del Quijote (Edition Reichenberger, 2001); Documentos
cervantinos: Nueva recopilación; lista e índices (Peter Lang, 2000);
Documentos de Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra (Universidad de Navarra,
1999). He has also put in print numerous articles, reviews, and prefaces
in peer-reviewed research journals, principally on Spanish Literature of
the Golden Age, written in English, German, Polish, and Spanish. His
most extensive contribution consists of ‘Efemérides cervantinos’, which
begins in 1463 and concludes in 1652, edited in La Gran Enciclopedia
cervantina (Editorial Castalia, 2006), directed by Doctor Honoris Causa
Carlos Alvar, Director del Centro de Estudios Cervantinos, Alcalá de
Henares. His new biography of Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra, based on
2520 Cervantine documents, of which 717 are new legal discoveries,
will be printed in ‘Vida de Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra,’ in 2020.
Jonathan Thacker is King Alfonso XIII Professor of Spanish Studies at
the University of Oxford and Fellow of Exeter College. He has edited
Lope de Vega’s El castigo sin venganza (Manchester: Manchester
University Press, 2015), co-edited A Companion to Lope de Vega
(Woodbridge: Tamesis, 2008), and is author of A Companion to Spanish
Golden Age Theatre (Woodbridge: Tamesis, 2007), as well as a
monograph and numerous articles on early modern Spanish drama. In
addition to teaching and writing about Spanish Golden Age theatre, he
has acted as adviser to the Royal Shakespeare Company, has translated
works by Cervantes and Tirso de Molina into English, and is editor of
the Aris and Phillips Hispanic Classics series.
Stacey Triplette is Associate Professor of Spanish at the University of
Pittsburgh at Greensburg. Her book, Reading, Chivalry, and Women’s
Culture in Early Modern Spain: From Amadís de Gaula to Don Quixote
(Amsterdam University Press, 2018) explores the representation of
literate women in Iberian chivalric romance and Don Quixote. Her
essays on Cervantes and romances of chivalry have appeared in Bulletin
of Spanish Studies, La corónica, and Cervantes: The Bulletin of the
Cervantes Society of America. Other essays appear in Connecting Past and
Present: Exploring the Influence of the Spanish Golden Age in the Twentieth
and Twenty-First Centuries and the Journal of Translation Studies. Her
current research focuses on the figure of the Amazon in early modern
Spanish literature. Other projects include digital humanities approaches
to Robert Southey’s English translation of Amadís de Gaula (http://
amadis.newtfire.org) and gender in the plays of Lope de Vega (http://
lope.newtfire.org).
Duncan Wheeler is Professor of Spanish and holds the Chair of
Spanish Studies at the University of Leeds. He is the Editor (Hispanic
Studies) for Modern Language Review and General Editor of the ‘Golden
Age Studies’ series for Peter Lang International Publishers. A published
translator and author of over thirty peer-reviewed journal articles/book
chapters, his monographs include Golden Age Drama in Contemporary
Spain: The Comedia on the Page, Stage and Screen (2012) and Following
Franco: Spanish Culture and Politics in Transition (2020). Duncan writes
for journalist outlets such as JotDown, The London Review of Books, The
Observer, La Revista de Libros, and The Times Literary Supplement. He has
been Visiting Professor at the Carlos III University in Madrid and
Fellow of St Catherine’s College, University of Oxford, currently
belongs to the ‘Grupo de estudios cervantinos’, based at the University
of Oviedo, and is a Fellow of the Spanish Academy of Stage Arts.
Edwin Williamson is King Alfonso XIII Professor Emeritus of Spanish
Studies, University of Oxford and Emeritus Fellow of Exeter College. He
is a Corresponding Fellow of the Real Academia Española and a
Comendador de Número de la Real Orden de Isabel la Católica,
awarded for services to Hispanic Studies. He has written extensively on
Cervantes and fiction in the Golden Age, including: The Half-Way House
of Fiction: ‘Don Quixote’ and Arthurian Romance (1984); Cervantes and
the Modernists: The Question of Influence (ed., 1994); Cervantes: Essays in
Memory of E.C. Riley (ed. with J. Robbins, 2005); Autoridad y poder en el
Siglo de Oro (ed. with I. Arellano and C. Strosetzki, 2009); La autoridad
política y el poder de las letras en el Siglo de Oro (ed. with J. M. Usunáriz,
2013). His publications also reflect his interest in Latin America, and
include The Penguin History of Latin America (1992, updated and
expanded 2009), which has been translated into Spanish (Fondo de
Cultura Económica, 2014) and Portuguese (Ediçoes 70, 2012); the
biography Borges: A Life (2004), translated into Spanish (Seix Barral,
2006) and six other languages; and The Cambridge Companion to Jorge
Luis Borges (ed., 2013). He is currently working on a critical study of
Don Quixote in the context of Cervantes’s evolution as a writer, a
project for which he has been awarded a Leverhulme Trust Major
Research Fellowship and elected to a visiting Cátedra de Excelencia at
the Universidad Carlos III de Madrid.
Diana de Armas Wilson is Professor Emerita of English and
Renaissance Studies, with a BA from Cornell University and a PhD from
the University of Denver. She is the author of Allegories of Love:
Cervantes’s Persiles and Sigismunda (Princeton UP, 1991) and Cervantes,
the Novel, and the New World (Oxford UP, 2000). She was awarded
three different NEH grants: to teach a summer seminar, for archival
research in Madrid, and to translate a Spanish captivity chronicle by
Antonio de Sosa, a fellow captive of Cervantes in Algiers. Volume 1 of
this translation is published as An Early Modern Dialogue with Islam (Ed.
María Antonia Garcés, Pub. U of Notre Dame Press, 2011), and Volume
2 is forthcoming. Wilson is sole editor of the latest Norton Critical
Edition of Don Quijote, forthcoming in 2020 in her revised translation.
Note on Translations
One of the stated aims of this volume is to foster awareness of the
works of Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra beyond the academic borders of
Hispanic Studies and linguistic barriers. For the purposes of
accessibility, authors have quoted text from primary sources in Spanish
so that people who would like to read closely the original language
analysed may do so. A translation into English will follow in each
instance appearing in square brackets. Some authors have chosen to use
a published English translation, which they have clearly cited; others
have chosen to translate the text themselves, notifying the reader of
this in a footnote. In cases of secondary readings not originally written
in English, just a translation by the author of the chapter was
acceptable unless a close reading of that particular text was deemed of
interest to the reader.
Translations of and references to the titles of Cervantes’s works have
varied over the centuries, so in the interest of consistency, I have
provided a list of all his works with translated titles at the beginning of
this volume. Within the chapters, only the original Spanish title
remains. Titles of works by other authors, however, have been
translated in individual chapters.
AMK
List of Cervantes’s Works
Works listed chronologically by genre
Drama
Los tratos de Argel [Life in Algiers] (c.1581)
Note: Cervantes twice refers to the title of this work as Los tratos de
Argel (tratos in plural), but on the two extant manuscripts the title is
given as El trato de Argel (tratos in singular).
La destrucción de Numancia [The Destruction of Numancia] (c.1583)
Note: Cervantes refers to the title of this work as La destrucción de
Numancia or simply La Numancia. On the two extant manuscripts,
the title is given as El cerco de Numancia [The Siege of Numancia] and
Tragedia de Numancia [Tragedy of Numancia].
La conquista de Jerusalén por Godofre de Bullón [The Conquest of
Jerusalem by Godfrey of Bouillon] (1586; attributed)
Ocho comedias, y ocho entremeses nuevos, nunca representados [Eight
Comedies, and Eight New Interludes, Never Performed] (1615)
Comedies
• El gallardo español [The Gallant Spaniard]
• La casa de los celos y las selvas de Ardenia [The House of Jealousy
and Woods of Ardenia]
• Los baños de Argel [The Bagnios of Algiers]
• El rufián dichoso [The Fortunate Ruffian]
• La gran sultana Doña Catalina de Oviedo [The Grand Sultana Doña
Catalina de Oviedo]
• El laberinto de amor [The Labyrinth of Love]
• La entretenida [The Diversion]
• Pedro de Urdemalas [Peter Mischief-Maker]
Interludes
• El juez de los divocios [The Divorce Judge]
• El rufián viudo llamado Trampagos [The Widowed Pimp Called
Trampagos]
• La elección de los alcaldes de Daganzo [The Election of the
Magistrates of Daganzo]
• La guarda cuidadosa [The Watchful Guard]
• El vizcaíno fingido [The Sham Biscayan]
• El retablo de las maravillas [The Marvellous Puppet Show]
• La cueva de Salamanca [The Magic Cave of Salamanca]
• El viejo celoso [The Jealous Old Man]
Several titles of plays from the 1580s
offered to us by Cervantes in other works
that have since been lost
• La confusa [Confusion] (1585)
• El trato de Constantinopla y muerte de Selín [Life in Constantinopla
and the Death of Selim] (1585)
• La gran turquesca [The Great Turkish Lady]
• La batalla naval [The Naval Battle]
• La Amaranta, o la del Mayo [The Amaranth, or the Lady of May]
• El bosque amoroso [The Forest of Love]
• La Única y La bizarra Arsinda [Arsinda, Courageous and Unique]
Prose
Primera Parte de La Galatea [First Part of Galatea] (1585)
• ‘Canto de Calíope’ [‘Song of Caliope’]
El ingenioso hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha [The Ingenious Nobleman
Don Quixote de la Mancha] (1605)
• El curioso impertinente [The Impertinent Curious Man]
• El capitán cautivo [The Captive’s Tale]
Segunda Parte del ingenioso caballero Don Quixote de la Mancha [The
Second Part of the Ingenious Knight Don Quixote de la Mancha] (1615)
Novelas ejemplares [The Exemplary Novels] (1613)
• La gitanilla [The Little Gypsy Girl]
• El amante liberal [The Generous Lover]
• Rinconete y Cortadillo
• La española inglesa [The Spanish English Woman]
• El licendiado Vidriera [The Glass Graduate]
• La fuerza de la sangre [The Force of Blood]
• El celoso extremeño [The Jealous Man from Extremadura]
• La ilustre fregona [The Illustrious Washer Woman]
• Las dos doncellas [The Two Damsels]
• La señora Cornelia [The Lady Cornelia]
• El casamiento engañoso [The Deceitful Marriage]
• El coloquio de los perros [The Dialogue of the Dogs]
Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda, historia septrional [The Travails of
Persiles and Sigismunda, a Northern Tale] (1617)
Poetry
Viaje del Parnasso [Voyage to Parnassus] (1614)
‘Adjunta al Parnaso’ [‘Addition to Parnassus’] (1614)
Various poems and lyrical ballads.
‘Al túmulo de Felipe II’ [‘To the burial (catafalque) mound for Philip II’]
Other lost works of indeterminate genre
Las semanas del jardín [Septenaries for the Garden]
Bernardo del Carpio
Introduction
Aaron M. Kahn
University of Sussex
In his biography of Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra, Donald McCrory
aptly titles the study No Ordinary Man, and when one delves into the
life and works of this unique individual, the more one realizes how
impactful his existence has been. Although best known the world over
for his masterpiece novel, Don Quixote de la Mancha, published in two
parts in 1605 and 1615, the antics of the would-be knight-errant and
his simple squire represent only a fraction of the trials and tribulations,
both in the literary world and in society at large, of this complex man.
Poet, playwright, soldier, slave, satirist, novelist, political commentator,
and literary outsider, Cervantes achieved a minor miracle by becoming
one of the rarest of things in the early modern world of letters: an
international best-seller during his lifetime, with his great novel being
translated into multiple languages before his death in 1616.
The son of a travelling barber-surgeon born in Alcalá de Henares
outside of Madrid in 1547, no one knows the precise date of
Cervantes’s birth. He was baptized on 9 October of that year, with
speculation that he was born eleven days earlier on 29 September, the
feast day of St Michael, his namesake. However, Catholic baptisms
would normally take place within a few days of birth to ensure the
cleansing of the young soul as soon as possible in case the child
succumbed to the variety of maladies that could cause the death of a
fragile new-born body, so eleven days after birth seems a long wait.
Very little is known of his early years, which is to be expected of
someone of relatively common beginnings in early modern times, but
he likely accompanied his father as the elder Cervantes tried to make a
living in Andalucía, Castilla la Mancha, and Madrid. Miguel would
have received a Jesuit education, exposing him to the great European
thinkers of the sixteenth century; even in the face of growing
Counterreformationism, young Miguel would have had access to the
works of Erasmus, Thomas More, and Juan Luis Vives, some of whose
works were eventually censored by the Inquisition.
In his early twenties, Miguel found himself in Italy at the service of
the young Cardinal Acquaviva, and in 1571 he was on the galley
Marquesa fighting for the Holy League against the Ottoman Empire in
the Battle of Lepanto. Here, he received life-altering injuries after a
harquebus shot rendered his left arm paralyzed for the remainder of his
life. In 1575, after his military service, he had begun his long-awaited
return to Spain but was captured by Algerian corsairs within sight of
the Spanish coast. He then spent the next five years as a slave in
Algiers, surviving deprivation, torture, and, most miraculously, four
failed escape attempts.
In 1580, he returned to Spain having been ransomed with funds
raised by the Trinitarian Order and began to experience a sense of
marginalization that would pervade many of his works. He failed in his
attempt to get a professional appointment from King Philip II, he
struggled financially, and became dejected by the apparent shift in
focus of the king away from fighting Islam in the Mediterranean and
towards the conquest of Christians in Europe; Philip had become King
of Portugal in 1580 and assumed the defeat of Protestantism as a
personal responsibility, seemingly turning his back on the tens of
thousands of Christians still in bondage in North Africa. Cervantes
began his first foray into being a professional writer in this decade,
forging a momentarily successful run as a playwright, if we are to
believe his own review of his works’ reception. However, the rise of
Lope de Vega and the comedia nueva once again pushed Cervantes to
the side.
While Cervantes abandoned the stage, he took up various
governmental posts in the late 1580s and early 1590s, which not only
required that he travel throughout Spain, but also resulted in two
incarcerations. Perhaps this was the cause of his apparently frosty
marriage to Catalina de Salazar in 1584. The couple would remain
childless, but Cervantes had an illegitimate daughter, Isabel de
Saavedra, born several months before his marriage. Only later, though,
would Isabel have a significant presence in his life.
By the early seventeenth century, and for the remaining twelve to
thirteen years of his life, Cervantes could finally live as a professional
writer. His works that still survive to this day and that he chose to
publish show a prolific writer demonstrating a mastery of language. His
themes are historical, satirical, and political, while casting comments
on topics such as the Church, the state of Spanish letters, the literary
academies, the institution of marriage, the tragedy of warfare, and an
emphasis on those people at the margins, which included him. His
works evade form and convention; they at times exaggerate or mock
existing generic constructions, and at other times are completely
original.
Cervantes was an ambiguous writer in terms of his characters, plot,
and generic structure, and this lack of clarity leads many scholars not
to trust him fully, if at all. Many of his works prompt varying and often
conflicting interpretations. In his prologues, in Viaje del Parnaso, and in
‘Adjunta al Parnaso’ (1614), he creates an avatar of himself through
which he provides us with the only description of his physical
appearance that we have; no contemporary portraits of him survive, if
they ever existed at all. His prologues mention an unnamed friend with
whom he speaks and discusses matters, but his references are often too
vague to get a clear understanding of his meaning.
We find an example of Cervantine ambiguity in the narration of Don
Quixote. In I.9, the action pauses as a second unnamed narrator,
speaking in the first person, recounts to the reader how he purchased
the manuscript of the tale we are reading from a marketplace in
Toledo. As it was written in Arabic script, he (without difficulty) finds a
morisco aljamiado, or one who speaks Castilian, who informs him that
the story was written by Cide Hamete Benengeli, an Arab historian. The
unnamed morisco describes the exploits of Don Quixote, whom our
second narrator recognizes immediately, but later in the chapter he
tells us that all Arabs are liars, so can we really believe either the
original manuscript or the translation? How do we judge the validity of
the text? Finally, in this chapter, the second narrator pays the morisco
to do the work, which takes a month and a half to complete. In Part II,
published ten years later, the story continues with only one month
having lapsed since the end of part Part I. In this second part, many of
the characters have read Part I and are fully aware of who Don Quixote
and Sancho are. However, if the original translation took a month and
a half, how can the characters in Part II know of Don Quixote and
Sancho only a month after the action of Part I has ceased? This is
especially confusing considering that Part I takes place in the late
1580s, while Part II makes reference to, among other things, the
expulsion of the moriscos in 1609.
Despite his international success, he reaped little financial reward
and repeatedly found himself relegated to the side, either in reality or
from his own perspective. Even his dynamic duo of Don Quixote and
Sancho were at times belittled by his literary rivals, due in part,
perhaps, to being envious of their global fame. His forays into the
literary academies in Spain resulted in a rather bitter reflection on the
poor 
quality 
of 
writing 
that 
was 
being 
celebrated 
by 
his
contemporaries, a position that at times caused him to be further
marginalized.
Just days before his death, he finished the dedication of his final
work, Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda. Those who like to
romanticize this time period and the truly artistic creations that
emerged from it like to say that Cervantes died on 23 April 1616, the
exact same day as William Shakespeare. In reality, Cervantes most
likely died on 22 April, and with Spain having changed to the
Gregorian Calendar in 1582 while Protestant England would cling to
the Julian Calendar until 1752, they in fact died eleven days apart.
However, it is certainly a serendipitous twist of fate that the writers
considered by many as the greatest ever in their respective languages
lived and died at the same time.
It is impossible to measure or even to put into words the impact that
the surviving works of Miguel de Cervantes have had on global human
culture. This volume contains seven sections, exploring in depth
Cervantes’s life and how the hardships he endured influenced his
writing. Twenty-nine specialists from numerous countries offer their
expertise with the most up-to-date research and interpretations to
complete this wide-ranging, but detailed, compendium of a writer not
known for much other than his famous novel outside of the Spanish-
speaking world; even the average Spaniard might struggle to name
more than three or four other Cervantine works. His famous novel Don
Quixote, his other prose works, his theatrical output, his poetry and
other writings, his sources, influences, and contemporaries, and finally
reception of his works over the last four hundred years provide a
comprehensive ‘handbook’ consisting of thirty-one chapters. All
chapters are part descriptive and part analytical, allowing for
accessibility beyond scholarly experts; anyone interested in learning
more about this complex writer and his even more complex writings
will find this volume informative. For academics or anyone seeking
deeper analytical studies, the chapters within provide the most up-to-
date research from world-renowned specialists. While there is some
cross-referencing between studies, readers do not need to follow any
particular order or chronology to attain meaning.
In addition, all chapters appear in English and include citations and
titles of works in their original form and in translation. This allows
those who can read Spanish and who wish to conduct a close reading of
the text to consult the original version, while also granting access to the
wonderful verses, lyrics, and prose to readers who prefer an English
translation. Authors have clearly indicated if the translation used is
their own or if has come from a published source. In order to avoid
repetition of translation of titles, all works by Cervantes only appear in
the original Spanish within chapters; there is a comprehensive list at
the beginning of this Handbook with translations into English provided
to avoid repetition or differing translations.
Section 1 provides the reader with a biographical exploration of
Miguel de Cervantes in order to establish a background for reference
throughout the volume. While we need to consider a writer’s life with a
degree of caution when studying his or her literary output, as the risk
of confusing author with narrator can potentially lead us astray,
Cervantes’s rich experiences of success, failure, pain, and imprisonment
inform his representations of Spanish and European culture and society
during his lifetime. Chapter 1, written by the world-renowned
Cervantine scholar and biographer Jean Canavaggio, provides a
detailed sketch of Cervantes’s life story addressing in detail his humble
beginnings, his travels, his military service, his captivity, his forays into
writing for the stage, his various professions, and finally his stint as a
professional writer. Relying on decades of research and internationally
acclaimed biographies, Canavaggio contributes an excellent building
block for the volume.
References to warfare appear throughout Cervantes’s literary
production, serving as a metaphor, background, or interpolation, even
in texts that concern themselves primarily with civilian life. Though
Cervantes celebrates his personal career as a soldier, particularly his
participation in the Battle of Lepanto, he subjects the theme of warfare
more generally to the irony and distance with which he treats other
cultural phenomena of early modern Spain. According to Stacey
Triplette in Chapter 2, for the individual soldier, citizen, or knight-
errant, personal heroism and correct behaviour appear to be possible,
but on the scale of the nation, warfare leads inevitably to financial
opportunism and human suffering.
Cervantes was born during the imperial reign of Charles V and
within the context of the largest empire seen on Earth. In Chapter 3,
Frederick de Armas studies how Cervantes reflects upon his experiences
throughout his works, both celebrating the great military achievements
of his era, especially those in which he fought, and problematizing
questions of empire, from specific tactics in war, to the morality of
waging war against other Christian nations, to general questions of
imperial expansionism. De Armas focuses on a continuing wavering and
ambiguity in Cervantes’s relations to empire, starting from his first
substantial works in the early 1580s until his death in 1616.
Because the relationship between autobiography and fiction are
central to the theme of captivity in Cervantes, María Antonia Garcés
initially examines Cervantes’s military career in the Mediterranean in
Chapter 4. Simultaneously, she explores the soldier’s experience as a
captive in Algiers and the way that this five-year ordeal in his life
reappears in his fiction. As the bibliography elicited by the subject of
captivity in Cervantes covers an uncountable number of scholarly
pages, this chapter is illustrative of classic and current scholarship
regarding this motif in the Spanish writer’s fiction, demonstrating that
perhaps above all other aspects of Cervantes’s life his five years as a
slave prove most influential.
Section 2 of this Handbook delves into the two-volume novel that
has given Cervantes legendary status throughout the world. The
seemingly simple concept of a quirky old gentleman who has his own
unique perspective on the world, accompanied by a rustic, ignorant
sidekick in fact created one of the most important works in the literary
canon. Its popularity was instantaneous and sustained, and as it has not
been out of print in over four-hundred years, it can be considered as
the second-best selling book of all time. The significance of El ingenioso
hidalgo don Quixote de la Mancha cannot be understated, and the
chapters in this section give the reader a glimpse into the reasons why.
Part I of Don Quixote was published in 1605, and in Chapter 5,
Edwin Williamson provides a comprehensive overview of this ground-
breaking piece of fiction about fiction. Cervantes explored the question
of fiction’s influence and the limits of artistic illusion by allowing the
question to play out in the form of fiction itself. In so doing, he created
a lively satire, at once critical and convivial, profoundly poignant and
seriously playful. In addressing that age-old question about the risks or
rewards of ‘living in’ an artful illusion, the novel’s versatility transcends
the parochial concerns of its time to remain pertinent and compelling
today.
In Chapter 6, also by Williamson, the author offers the reader an
informative study of Part II, published ten years after Part I. He
discusses how on his previous sallies, Don Quixote had transformed
everyday things into chivalric fantasies—inns into castles, windmills
into giants, and so on; however, in Part II he tends to see reality as it
appears, but is mostly taken in by pseudo-chivalric episodes invented
by other characters. Cervantes’s different approach in Part II allows
him to address more of the social reality of early seventeenth-century
Spain than was possible in Part I. In the sequel, knight and squire are
invited to people’s houses, attend a wedding, stay as guests at the castle
of a duke and duchess, come across a gang of Catalan bandits, and visit
the city of Barcelona, all of which provide opportunities for social
observation and critique.
Evidence suggests that Cervantes had been composing Part II over a
relatively extended period of time, and as shown by the flurry of
printed production of his works between 1613 and 1617, his attention
was divided along various literary lines. Perhaps if he had waited too
long he might not have finished it before his death in 1616, but as
James Iffland discusses in Chapter 7, Cervantes soon found himself
facing yet another challenge to his prosperity. In 1614, someone
writing under the pseudonym of Alonso Fernández de Avellaneda
published his own continuation of Cervantes’s masterpiece entitled the
Segundo tomo del ingenioso hidalgo don Quijote de la Mancha, allegedly
printed in the city of Tarragona. Iffland’s chapter explores this incident
and the affect that it had on the original author of Don Quixote. While
most studies of the so-called apocryphal second part focus on
ascertaining the name of the author, whose identity remains unknown
to this day, Iffland’s concentrates on the aesthetic and literary value of
the illicit novel.
Chapter 8 by Yolanda Iglesias presents a study on narrative structure
and the literary tradition pertaining to Don Quixote. As stated above,
this is a book that skews, imitates, satirizes, and criticizes conventional
literary forms and devices, making it the unique piece of fiction that it
is. Firstly, Iglesias provides an overview of recent scholarship when
trying to establish what Cervantes intended his narrative structure to
be, or even if he intended there to be a definitive structure, as this is an
issue yet to be resolved. Secondly, this chapter addresses some of the
unexplained gaps in the narrative and frames the relevance of the
structure in Don Quixote, thus supporting the argument that Cervantes’s
masterpiece is the first modern novel.
In Chapter 9, Donald Palmer explores the five ways in which
philosophy appears in Don Quixote, from the author’s familiarity with
philosophical thought from antiquity to his own times to how later
philosophers considered his work. Palmer shows that one of the reasons
for 
the 
apparent 
modernity 
of 
Don 
Quixote 
is 
Cervantes’s
comprehension of the philosophical past and his eventual escape from
its grasp through his intellectual strategies that are anticipatory of our
own period. These strategies are related both to the philosophical
perspicacity of the novel, and to its sharp humour.
It is a safe argument to make that outside the of the field of Hispanic
Studies, Don Quixote is the only Cervantine work that most people
could successfully identify; even within the Spanish-speaking world,
few would be able to name many more beyond it. However, as the
following sections demonstrate, Cervantes proved to be a very prolific
writer and produced works in varying styles and structures. Section 3
enters into his prose works other than Don Quixote, along with works
that are attributed to him, lost, or promised by him, whether or not
they ever materialized.
Benjamin J. Nelson dedicates Chapter 10 to Cervantes’s first
published work, the pastoral novel La Galatea, which appeared in print
in 1585. Nelson argues that by choosing the pastoral genre as his first
substantial narrative, Cervantes not only continues the tradition of
libros de pastores, but surpasses it. Simultaneously, in true Cervantine
fashion, he deviates from the norm by introducing himself as an Orphic
poet who participates in the famed rota Virgilii, or Virgil’s Wheel.
Nelson addresses the issue of why Cervantes chose the pastoral for his
first published piece of writing, along with the positive and negative
reception that it has received among Cervantes scholars.
In his Novelas ejemplares, published nearly three decades after La
Galatea, Cervantes claims to have been the first to write novels in the
Spanish language. In Chapter 11, Barry Ife studies this collection of
twelve short novels printed in 1613 with precision and addresses the
issue of the title itself. Even to contemporary Spaniards, the title of
exemplary novels would have been a curiosity and perceived perhaps
as arrogant. Widely studied and often imitated worldwide, in some
cases almost immediately, Cervantes’s Novelas ejemplares represent a
crucial component of understanding Cervantes as a writer.
A novel in the Byzantine style, Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda,
published posthumously in 1617, serves as the subject of Chapter 12 by
Michael Armstrong-Roche. Proud of the 1605 Quixote’s wild popularity,
Cervantes was also anxious to shape his literary legacy so that it would
not be swallowed up by the run-away success of that burlesque about
the mad knight and his proverb-spouting sidekick. Armstrong-Roche
provides a comprehensive overview of the work that Cervantes
considered the jewel in his crown.
A prominent theme of Cervantes’s writings, most notably Don
Quixote, known even by people who have never read it, is madness, and
in Chapter 13, Rachel Noel Bauer writes a compendium of the topic to
serve as a guide to future Cervantistas. She sheds light on how madness
was perceived in sixteenth-century Spanish society, how Cervantes
represents it within his works, and how this behaviour has been
interpreted by critics from different fields and viewpoints. Within
Cervantes’s voluminous output, containing countless characters, no two
characters display the same causes or symptoms, and none displays
mental imbalances or instabilities throughout an entire work. As the
son of a travelling barber-surgeon, Cervantes could feasibly have had
access to medical books from the era that covered such ailments, even
if today they are not considered medically accurate, and this combined
with his own potential demons from his years in captivity allowed him
to depict various manifestations of mental illness.
In Chapter 14, Brian Brewer contends that Cervantes’s entire
practice of creative fiction is based on a critical engagement with
heroic romance narratives and the inclusion of multiple discourses; this
is evident from La Galatea to Persiles y Sigismunda. Don Quixote and the
Novelas ejemplares likewise reflect this interplay of romance tropes and
discursive multiplicity. These, the most prevalent prose works by
Cervantes, form the focus of Brewers study of Cervantes’s relationship
with generic forms and his willingness to stray from them.
Cervantes’s prose works, particularly Don Quixote, have received the
lion’s share of scholarly attention, but had he experienced more success
in the 1580s in the writing profession he initially entered, and
apparently preferred, there exists the speculative possibility that they
might not have come to fruition. Section 4 imparts an in-depth look
into Cervantes’s dramatic works, beginning immediately after his return
from captivity in 1580 and extending through to his final years. The
1580s represented a time of transition in Spanish drama, and Cervantes
was caught up in the middle of it; preferring to follow a more classical
style, albeit once again with his own twists and turns, and refusing to
adhere to the new dramatic form championed by his rival Lope de
Vega, Cervantes’s dramatic career proved frustrating.
As David G. Burton writes in Chapter 15, the theatre had long been
a popular form of entertainment in Spain, and Cervantes records having
seen the great Lope de Rueda on stage as a young man. With the advent
of professional acting troupes and permanent theatres, Cervantes
looked to join the likes of Juan de la Cueva in the theatre world. Burton
studies Cervantes’s two extant plays from this era, Los tratos de Argel
and La destrucción de Numancia, along with the attributed La conquista
de Jerusalén, to establish a context for the pre-Lopean successes and
failures that Cervantes experienced in this milieu.
Perhaps what demonstrates Cervantes’s desire to be known as a
dramatist most is the fact that he never gave up writing plays. In 1615,
he took the unusual step of publishing his Ocho comedias, y ocho
entremeses nuevos, nunca representados, a collection of eight plays and
eight comic interludes that, according to Cervantes, had never been
performed; unusual because these were plays that were printed before
ever having been performed. Although they were printed in one
collection, they typically receive scholarly attention separately. Due to
the popularity of Don Quixote and the works of Lope de Vega, it is only
recently that Hispanists have returned to Cervantes’s dramatic
production with a positive perspective.
In Chapter 16, Melanie S. Henry’s analysis of the Ocho comedias
divides the plays into three thematic sections, and rather than studying
the collection in relation to Lope de Vega and the comedia nueva,
instead Henry emphasizes Cervantes’s prioritization of the spoken word
over exaggerated and overly-adorned set designs. Cervantes certainly
resisted what he deemed to be a form of drama that appealed more to
the populace than to the more educated audience, but the departure of
the Ocho comedias from what had become the established norm, long
seen as the Cervantes’s main modus operandi, is convincingly reassessed.
Chapter 17, then, investigates the second part of this publication,
the ocho entremeses, or comic, often farcical, interludes typically
performed between acts of full-length plays. Carolyn Lukens-Olson
writes that they ‘brought life and relevancy back to a tired, outmoded,
and ill-regarded genre of Spanish theatre’. Although they are
structurally simple, brief in length, and often seen as vulgar and
insignificant, Cervantes’s revitalization of the genre included his own
satire and social commentary, thus making them much more than
entertaining farces.
Despite the achievement of finally having theatrical works of his
printed, Cervantes still displayed the frustration of not having seen
them performed on stage. His uneasy relationship with the comedia
nueva and his refusal to submit to its rule did not signal the death knell
of his dramatic aspirations. Moisés R. Castillo devotes Chapter 18 to the
theatricality and stagecraft that flows through Cervantes’s works,
regardless of whether or not they were specifically written for the
stage, and he did so perhaps more than any other prose writer of the
era. His Novelas ejemplares and various aspects of Don Quixote and the
Persiles contain shifting scenes, dramatic characters, and dialogue of a
Humanist nature, all of which find their roots in Cervantes’s
relationship with the theatre.
In Chapter 19, Kathleen Jeffs focuses on the use of polymetric verse
in Cervantes’s drama, including his full-length plays and his interludes.
As an experienced international traveller and a learned writer,
Cervantes made use of different types of poetic verses in his theatrical
works, including more Italianate verses. His influences were wide-
reaching, and like other dramatists, Cervantes used different verses to
reflect situations and social status of characters. Jeffs demonstrates
Cervantes’s sophistication in his dramatic composition.
Section 5 of the Oxford Handbook of Cervantes encompasses
Cervantes’s poetic compositions and other writings. In Chapter 20,
Adrienne L. Martín tells the reader that Cervantes wrote poetry
throughout his entire life, often referring to its importance in his prose
works, many of which contained poems and songs. Despite poetry’s
significance to the great writer, there are surprisingly few studies
dedicated to it compared to those of his dramatic and prose works.
Following Martín’s study, Esther Fernández devotes Chapter 21 to
Cervantes’s great mock epic poem, Viaje del Parnaso, along with its
prose epilogue ‘Adjunta al Parnaso’, published in 1614. Ignored for so
long by Cervantine scholars or dismissed as a minor work, it contains
biting satire and criticism of the state of arts and poetry in Spain in the
early seventeenth century, at least in Cervantes’s view. Fernández
correctly emphasizes that Cervantes chose to devote time and energy to
completing this long poem and somewhat enigmatic ‘Adjunta’ at a time
when, although in poor health physically and financially, he was also
in the process of completing his Novelas ejemplares, the second part of
Don Quixote, and Persiles.
Studying Cervantes’s works that were printed or that still exist in
manuscript form has enriched the field of Hispanic Studies incalculably,
but Chapter 22, my own contribution to this volume, centres on what
we either do not have or on what possibly has survived to the twenty-
first century. A writer as prolific as Cervantes most certainly wrote
more than what we can access today; in fact, in his works he provides
us with numerous titles of past compositions that have been lost, along
with others that he promises his devoted readers, such as sequels to La
Galatea and the Persiles; no trace of these latter two survive. In
addition, a number of anonymous pieces have been attributed to him
and others that have carried his name have disputed authorship.
Section 6 represents a step away from considering Cervantes and his
works exclusively, and places the writer in the historical and literary
context in which he lived. Born during the reign of Charles V, a period
of expansion and relative tolerance, Cervantes lived through the entire
reign of Philip II and much of Philip III’s, witnessing increasingly more
staunch Counterreformationist policies, which created a decidedly
intolerant atmosphere. This section explores Cervantes’s sources of
inspiration, those who influenced him, and his interaction with
contemporaries in Spain and abroad.
Beginning this section is Stacey Triplette’s second contribution to the
volume on Cervantes’s sources and his own influences. Chapter 23
informs the reader of how Cervantes’s works reference a complex set of
ancient, medieval, and early modern sources. Cervantes in particular is
aware of his own historicity and of his place in a chain of imitation,
and he adapts and combines sources in ways that are often difficult to
unravel. This chapter offers the reader a guide to many of the most
important influences on Cervantes’s literary production.
Chapter 24 details the often conflictive relationship between
Cervantes and Lope Félix de Vega Carpio, the two most influential
literary figures of early modern Spain. Jonathan Thacker writes how,
although both men created success for themselves and appeared to
maintain a level of mutual professional respect, such a conclusion
would be misleading and would mask an intriguing, deep, productive,
and at times unsavoury relationship between the two men and their
work.
Cervantes’s uneasy coexistence with Lope de Vega is representative
of a wider sense of disillusionment and marginalization he felt in the
literary circles in which he participated. Victoria Ríos Castaño informs
us in Chapter 25 of the manner in which Cervantes ridicules these
literary circles in his published works, particularly the Viaje del Parnaso
and ‘Adjunta al Parnaso’. Cervantes’s references to the literary
academies he frequented and to contemporary poets, playwrights, and
patrons shed light on his uneasy relationship with those around him.
In Chapter 26, Zenón Luis-Martínez takes us beyond the borders of
Spain and provides a comprehensive overview of Cervantes’s reception
in and influence on readers and writers in England. Even during
Cervantes’s own lifetime, Don Quixote as a novel and the various
episodes and tales it contains gained immense popularity in England.
From the first English adaptations and recreations only two short years
after its initial 1605 publication, through the numerous incarnations of
Cervantine writings in the subsequent four centuries, Luis-Martínez
demonstrates how England embraced the would-be knight errant and
his squire.
Continuing with the theme of Cervantes abroad, Diana de Armas
Wilson offers a look into Cervantes’s perception of the Americas and
the successes of Cervantine works in the Americas. Demonstrating the
universal appeal of Cervantes’s works, Chapter 27 studies his impact in
the Spanish and English-speaking countries throughout the continents
from the first arrival of Don Quixote in the Indies in 1606.
The seventh and final section of the Oxford Handbook of Cervantes
considers the reception of Cervantes’s works, which has varied over the
centuries since his death; scholarly interest in who he was has played a
central role in our perception of the man and the writer. Research has
resulted in the discovery of numerous documents and the creation of a
more comprehensive picture of his life. Krzysztof Sliwa dedicates
Chapter 28 to a study of Cervantes’s biographers and how they have
contributed to our knowledge of the creator of Don Quixote.
Chapter 29 by Duncan Wheeler focuses on Cervantes’s presence on
the screen. Just as the various theatrical representations and
adaptations of Don Quixote and Cervantes’s other great works brought
the stories to countless numbers of people who otherwise would not, or
could not, have read them, so do the film versions; film also creates a
sub-branch of Cervantine studies. In this chapter, Wheeler explores the
dialectic between commemorative culture and Spanish screen fictions
based on the life and works of Cervantes.
Chapter 30 by Robert Oakley and Chapter 31 by Bruce Burningham
end the volume by giving us a thorough overview of Cervantine
criticism throughout the centuries. Chapter 30 describes the reception,
interpretations, and literary critical approaches to Cervantine works
through to the end of the twentieth century. Burningham takes over in
the year 2000 and considers the current and future state of Cervantine
studies. While it is impossible to study all approaches and critical
responses to Cervantes since his first publication in 1585, these two
scholars write comprehensive overviews of the most important trends
and movements associated with Cervantine criticism.
Section 1
Biography
Chapter 1
Cervantes’s Life
Jean Canavaggio
Université Paris Nanterre
Translated by
Jonathan Thacker and Aaron M. Kahn
Most of what we know about the life of Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra
comes from information assembled by those researchers who dedicated
their efforts to exploring public, parish, notarial, and private archives
beginning in the first third of the eighteenth century. The documents
they published deal above all with his Algerian captivity and his
activities as a functionary in Andalusia, as well as other events that
touched upon his life, such as, for example, the death of Gaspar de
Ezpeleta, who was mortally wounded close to Cervantes’s house in
Valladolid in 1605. Very little of the documentation sheds light upon
Cervantes’s life as a writer, let alone his personality. Thus, using this
material as a base, one has to proceed with considerable caution in
order to go through the successive stages of a life ‘tan escasa de noticias
como rica en sinuosidades’ [‘as lacking in detail as it is rich in
suggestive possibilities’].1
A biography of Cervantes cannot be limited to a mere succession of
events, as it first of all needs to incorporate the analyses and
conclusions of scholars. In order to establish with the necessary rigour
what these findings tell us, we must dispense with the myths that
flourished in different periods, such as, for example, a crypto-Jewish
Cervantes or an avid reader of the Kabbalistic texts, so crucial to his
masterpiece. Secondly, it is important to contextualize within his era a
writer who, in the eyes of the layman, tends to sum up the Golden Age
or even incarnate it either by being considered to have reflected its
norms or, conversely, to have represented its contradictions. Finally, we
must approach Cervantes as closely as possible, following the course of
an existence which, a mere journey during his lifetime, has become a
destination that we strive to reach. From such suppositions it is
necessary to contemplate a trajectory that, taking us from the writer’s
birth to his death, presents us with a good number of grey areas.
We know nothing, or almost nothing, of his childhood and
adolescence; on several occasions, during the months and even years
between the end of his Andalusian assignments and settling
permanently in Madrid, we lose his trail. We know nothing about the
underlying motivations for the majority of his decisions: his sudden
departure for Italy, joining up with the galleys of Don Juan de Austria,
his marriage to a young woman twenty years his junior, his decision to
leave the marital home after three years of life together, or his return to
writing after a silence of close to twenty years. We have lost a good
number of his works, and we question the authenticity of those which
were attributed to him in the nineteenth century; as far as those on
which his reputation is based are concerned, we have only the smallest
details of how they came into being. In his own hand, we possess only
notarial documents, some accounts, and two or three letters. Finally,
none of the apparent portraits of him is trustworthy. This explains the
many myths about his life, myths which reflect our desire to fill the
gaps in our knowledge, no matter the cost. They represent above all a
deeper aspiration to discover the personality of the man who lived
them beyond just the succession of events, even at the risk of producing
an invented image of him.
In this situation, instead of dedicating themselves to a piece of mere
detective work concentrating simply on material facts, biographers of
Cervantes have to understand the logic of their endeavour. To discover
a life means to construct it; to make Cervantes live again is, like it or
not, to determine who the man is for eternity. As a result, it is essential
to take into account everything that allows us to approach him
intimately, returning to the texts not to search for the man—a mere
illusion—but to extract from them everything that might shed light
upon an existence that, as the years went by, became gradually mixed
up with the routines of a writer reconciled in his final years with his
first calling. To follow this path, it is important to grant the right
degree of value to these texts since what Cervantes tells us about
himself has to be treated with the utmost caution, not only in his works
of fiction, whose testimony has not always been skilfully utilized, but
also on the pages in which he is writing as himself. Dedications,
prologues, and poems of an autobiographical nature offer us fragments
of a portrait of an artist whose truth, by definition, does not require
verification. Cervantes in the first person is not a real-life person but an
imaginary being. He is made up, of course, of elements taken from the
lived experience of the soldier of Lepanto, but engendered by a specific
way of wording things that reveals that the boundary between life and
creation is not as well-defined as it at first might seem.
Childhood
We have known that Cervantes’s birthplace was Alcalá de Henares
since the mid-eighteenth century, and that the date of his baptism was
9 October 1547, but his exact date of birth has not been established. It
may well have been 29 September, St Michael’s Day. What is more
interesting to note when it comes to situating this event in its context is
the fact that it occurred in such an important year—one in which
Francis I of France and Henry VIII of England passed into history.
Emperor Charles V, victorious over the German Protestant princes at
Mühlberg, reached the height of his power, and the establishment of
the Council of Trent two years earlier initiated profound reforms of the
Catholic Church. Within the peninsula, worthy of note in that same
year are two decisions that are indicative of the attitudes that would
become typical of the Spain of the first three Habsburg kings: the
promulgation of the first Papal Index prohibiting seditious books and,
as a result of the vote of the Cathedral Chapter of Toledo, the adoption
of the first limpieza de sangre [purity of blood] statutes.
In such a context, the ancestry of the writer has been and continues
to be a controversial topic. Although he was considered to be an Old
Christian in the report prepared at his own behest on his return from
Algiers, he never presented tangible proof of his blood purity. His
paternal grandfather, the graduate Juan de Cervantes, collaborated as a
judge with the Santo Oficio, but the latter’s wife, Leonor de
Torreblanca, belonged to a family of doctors from Córdoba, and as such
may well have possessed some Jewish blood. Miguel’s father, Rodrigo,
married Leonor de Cortinas in about 1542, and she belonged to a
family of peasants from Old Castile. His modest occupation of travelling
surgeon and his constant wanderings around the peninsula while his
children were young have not failed to arouse suspicions about his
origins, leading Américo Castro to consider him a Jewish convert,
though other Cervantes specialists refuse to admit any such hypothesis.
Whatever the case, one should not exaggerate the importance of this
controversy. Were it to be shown one day that Cervantes came from
New Christian stock, this discovery would maintain intact the bridge
that spans the chasm between his vision of the world and that of Mateo
Alemán, his contemporary, who certainly was not an Old Christian. As
Antonio Domínguez Ortíz puts it, ‘el autor del Quijote pudo tener algún
antepasado converso, pero eso ni está demostrado ni influyó en su obra.
Las raíces del sereno criticismo que campea en la novela inmortal hay
que buscarlas en otras fuentes’ [‘the author of Don Quixote might have
had an ancestor who was a convert, but we do not know for sure and it
did not influence his work. The roots of this sober criticism that
pervades the immortal novel must be sought in other sources’].2
Following the births of his two sisters, Andrea and Luisa, Miguel
became the third of five children, with two others known to have been
born but presumed to have died in infancy. A younger brother,
Rodrigo, who shared his captivity in Algiers, and another sister,
Magdalena, followed Miguel. In 1555, a brother, Juan, came into the
world, but no other information about his life exists. Nothing certain is
known about the first twenty years of Miguel’s life, including his
education. Neither is it known whether he was with his father during
the latter’s stays in Córdoba and then Seville, perhaps as a pupil of the
Jesuits who had founded a school there. However, he was with his
family in Madrid in 1566 a few years after Philip II had established his
court there. And three years later Cervantes took his first steps as a
writer with four poetic compositions included by his teacher, the
Humanist Juan de López de Hoyos, rector of the Estudio de la Villa, in
the Relación oficial [Official Account] published on the death of the
queen, Isabel de Valois, in 1568. Its editor calls Cervantes ‘amado
discípulo’ [‘much-loved disciple’], though this brief mention does not
help us judge the level of education reached by a young man who did
not matriculate in any university and who was given the epithet,
during his lifetime, of ‘ingenio lego’, a man of intelligence without
having studied.3
Lepanto
In the year that this Relación was published, Cervantes headed to Italy,
a departure said to have been prompted by a duel in which a master of
works called Antonio de Sigura was injured.4 Perhaps a more likely
reason for his departure is the possible recommendation from a family
member of Cardinal Espinosa, High Inquisitor and President of the
Council of Castile, which allowed him to spend a few months in Rome
in the service of the young Cardinal Acquaviva. We can infer that his
intimacy with Ascanio Colonna resulted from this post, and the
relationship was revealed subsequently in the dedication to La Galatea.
Soon, however, probably in the summer of 1571, he embraced a
military life, enlisting in Diego de Urbina’s company, with which his
younger brother Rodrigo was already fighting. This decision, taken just
as the Holy League’s armada under Don John of Austria was about to
confront the Turkish threat—all the greater after the Ottoman conquest
of Cyprus—led to his embarkation on the galley, Marquesa. On board,
at the Battle of Lepanto on 7 October 1571, he fought ‘muy
valientemente’ [‘very bravely’] according to his comrades. Despite
suffering from a fever, he refused to ‘meterse so cubierta’ [‘go below
decks’], since he ‘más quería morir peleando por Dios e por su rey’
[‘preferred to die fighting for God and for his king’].5 And in the
particularly dangerous position assigned to him, where the skiffs are
situated at the stern of the ship, he was hit by harquebus shots twice in
the chest and once in his left hand, causing the permanent loss of its
use. Hence the epithet that posterity would bequeath to him: ‘el manco
de Lepanto’ [‘the one-handed man of Lepanto’]. He himself would
evoke the events when replying to the insults of Avellaneda in the
prologue to Part II of Don Quixote in 1615:
Lo que no he podido dejar de sentir es que me note de viejo y de
manco, como si hubiera sido en mi mano haber detenido el tiempo, que
no pasase por mí, o si mi manquedad hubiera nacido en alguna taberna,
sino en la más alta ocasión que vieron los siglos pasados, los presentes,
ni esperan ver los venideros.6
[What I couldn’t help resenting is that he attacks me for being old and
one-handed, as if it had been in my power to halt time and prevent it
from ravaging me, or as if I had been maimed in some tavern brawl
rather than at the greatest battle that past or present ages have ever
seen or that future ages can ever hope to see.]7
Once he had recovered from his wounds in Messina, Cervantes took
part in the military campaigns undertaken by Don Juan de Austria in
1572 and 1573—with mixed success—in Navarino, Corfu, and Tunis.
He was deeply marked by his years in Italy, where part of the action of
several of his prose works takes place (El curioso impertinente, El
licenciado Vidriera, Persiles y Sigismunda, etc.), and he seems to have had
a special fondness for his months spent in Naples, where it is assumed
he belonged to various literary circles. Finally, he decided to return to
Spain to reap the rewards for his service with Don Juan of Austria and
the Duke of Sessa. On 26 September 1575, the galley El Sol in which he
had embarked three weeks earlier in Naples fell into the hands of the
corsair Arnaut Mamí—not close to the Tres Marías, as was thought for
a long time, but, as Juan Bautista Avalle Arce has shown, close to the
Catalan coast, not far from Cadaqués.8
Captivity
Taken to Algiers as a slave, Cervantes endured a five-year period of
captivity which left a profound impression on his oeuvre, especially the
two plays set in the city—Los tratos de Argel and Los baños de Argel—
and the captive’s tale, interpolated in the first part of Don Quixote. We
possess a broad understanding of this period of captivity thanks to
three things: the declarations gathered together at the author’s behest
in the reports of 1578 and 1580, which include testimony of friends,
military comrades, and fellow slaves; the surviving evidence of the
efforts undertaken by their family to ransom Miguel and his brother;
and the details provided in the Topographía e historia general de Argel
[Topography and General History of Algiers], published in 1612 under the
name of Fray Diego de Haedo. More recently, this work has been
partially attributed to Antonio de Sosa, Cervantes’s companion, and, by
others, to the author of Don Quixote himself. It is a work of great
interest in which we are told that the captivity and deeds of the one-
handed man of Lepanto ‘pudiera hacerse particular historia’ [‘are
worthy of a story to themselves’].9
Amongst these deeds his four escape attempts stand out. Two were
by land and two by sea, and he took full responsibility for them upon
himself. On the last of these occasions, in November 1579, he was
betrayed by a Dominican from Extremadura, Doctor Juan Blanco de
Paz, and he appeared before Hasan Pasha, King of Algiers, a man with
a reputation for vengeance and cruelty. However, he escaped the death
penalty. The reason for this treatment, according to what can be
gleaned from the testimony of some of his companions, seems to have
been the relationships that Cervantes had apparently established with
Turks, renegades, and Algerians. These links were closer and more
complex than one might have expected, especially those with ‘un arraez
muy grande amigo del rrei, que se dice morato atarraez maltrapillo,
renegado español’ [‘a captain who was a great friend of the king, said
to be Morato Atarraez Maltrapillo, a Spanish renegade’].10 Finally, with
his family making a great effort to secure his freedom, he was
ransomed on 19 September 1580 by the Trinitarian friars at a cost of
500 ducats.
Return to Writing
Despite presenting details of his military service, Cervantes did not reap
the expected rewards. This might have been because he was unable to
take advantage of the sort of support that was essential at a time when
factional in-fighting intensified on Philip II’s departure to be crowned
King of Portugal, a realm recently added to his dominions. As a result
of a journey to Thomar, where the king had summoned the Portuguese
Cortes, he was entrusted with a short mission to Oran in May or June of
1581, where he had an interview with the mayor of Mostaganem. The
exact purpose of the visit is unknown.
His return to Madrid saw developments in Cervantes’s personal life:
he apparently fell for a certain Ana de Villafranca, also known as Ana
Franca de Rojas, the wife of an innkeeper, who, in the autumn of 1584,
bore him an illegitimate daughter, Isabel; and in December of the same
year he married Catalina de Salazar, the daughter of a recently
deceased minor nobleman from Esquivias, a place known for its vines
and olive groves. This marriage led him to settle in his wife’s town but
not to lose contact with the literary circles of the court. These were
precisely the years in which the foundations of the theatre industry
were cemented in place. This development was supported by the
partnership of the guilds, which were able to subsidize the hospices and
hospitals in each city thanks to the money generated by performances
of both sacred and profane plays. The companies of itinerant actors
played their part, and there were favourable conditions for the
construction in each major city of permanent theatrical premises, the
so-called corrales de comedias. Cervantes had his part in this process,
though he failed to achieve the results he had hoped, composing
several plays of which two are extant in manuscript copies: Los tratos de
Argel, inspired by memories of his Algerian captivity, and Numancia, a
work that was to be well and truly resurrected in the middle of the
twentieth century. It is difficult to know how these works were
received by audiences, since we have no testimony to guide us other
than the author’s own words: ‘sin que se les ofreciese ofrenda de
pepinos ni de otra cosa arrojadiza’ [‘without their being greeted with
cucumbers or other projectiles’].11 In any case, the whereabouts of the
‘veinte o treinta comedias’ [‘twenty or thirty plays’] that Cervantes
claims to have penned in those years are unknown, and he gives us the
titles of only ten of them.
At the same time, Cervantes wrote the Primera parte de la Galatea,
dividida en seis libros, a work which emerges from the presses of the
bookseller Blas de Robles in March of 1585. It is a major contribution
to the genre of the pastoral romance, itself initiated in the mid-1500s
by Jorge de Montemayor’s La Diana. Years later, in his El coloquio de los
perros, Cervantes would recall, not without irony, the clichés of the
genre—a bucolic setting, permanent spring-time, the complaints of the
lover faced with his beloved’s indifference—satirizing them through the
words of the wise dog, Berganza, who concludes his diatribe with the
declaration that ‘todos aquellos libros son cosas soñadas y bien escritas
para entretenimiento de los ociosos, y no verdad alguna’ [‘all of those
books belong to a world of dreams and are well-written entertainment
for the leisured, but not at all true’].12
Assignments in Andalusia
At the beginning of June of 1587, Cervantes was in Seville, having bid
farewell to his wife in circumstances about which we know little. ‘Tuve
otras cosas en que ocuparme; dejé la pluma y las comedias’ [‘I had
other things to do; I left behind my pen and my playwriting’].13
Whether he felt frustrated at the failure of his literary career to prosper,
whether he was unwilling to dedicate the rest of his life to tending the
olive trees and grape-vines belonging to his mother-in-law, or whether
he was attracted to work which resonated better with his desire for
independence, he took advantage of the preparations for the naval
expedition against England, decreed by Philip II, to obtain a position as
a commissioner, responsible for providing wheat and oil for the fleet. In
this role Cervantes travelled the roads of Andalusia requisitioning the
necessary supplies, very unpopular with the well-to-do peasants and the
prebendary canons, who were even more reluctant contributors after
the disastrous failure of the Invincible Armada in the summer of 1588.
Keen to obtain a post in the New World, he presented a petition to
the king on 21 May 1590 with his accompanying service record via the
President of the Council of the Indies. In it he mentions amongst ‘los
tres o cuatro que al presente están vaccos’ [‘the three or four posts at
present vacant’], ‘la contaduría del nuevo reyno de Granada’ [‘the
accountancy of the new kingdom of Granada’], the ‘gobernación de la
provincia de Soconusco en Guatimala’ [‘government of the province of
Soconusco in Guatemala’], that of ‘contador de las galeras de
Cartagena’ [‘accountant of the Cartagena galleys’], and that of
‘corregidor de la ciudad de la Paz’ [‘magistrate of the city of La Paz’].
He concluded that ‘con qualquiera de estos officios que V. M. le haga
merced, la resçiuirá, porque es hombre auil y suffiçiente y benemérito
para que V. M. le haga merced’ [‘he would accept any one of these
offices you were kind enough to grant him, because he is an able,
competent, and worthy man, at your service’]. On 6 June, Doctor
Núñez Morquecho, Clerk of the Council, inserted a refusal in the
margins of the document: ‘Busque por acá en que se le haga merced’
[‘Look here in Spain for something to be granted’].14
This painful experience was certainly tempered by the fascination
that Cervantes felt for Seville, and this helps to explain his lengthy
stays on the banks of the Guadalquivir, far from Esquivias and his wife.
He accumulated a rich stock of experiences of which he took advantage
in his works set in Seville, such as the play El rufián dichoso and
amongst the Novelas ejemplares, El celoso extremeño, Rinconete y
Cortadillo, and El coloquio de los perros. However, without concrete
facts, it is hard to understand the process that took him from lived
experience to literary creation. As far as his literary career is
concerned, there is little to go on apart from the odd poem and an
(apparently unfulfilled) contract with the actor manager, Rodrigo
Osorio, to produce six plays ‘en los tiempos que pudiere’ [‘at his
convenience’].15
Imprisonment
In August 1594, Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra was offered a new
assignment, which took him to the kingdom of Granada in order to
collect two and a half million maravedís of tax arrears. By this time he
had been using a second surname for four years, one no doubt taken
from a distant relative, but which could possibly have referred to the
word ‘Shaibedraa’. This word comes from the dialect of Algiers and was
a nickname that might refer to his use of only one hand during his
years of captivity.16 After travelling through Guadix, Baza, Motril,
Ronda, and Vélez-Málaga, a journey notable for various complications,
he ended his rounds and returned to Seville. That was when the
bankruptcy of the businessman Simón Freire, in whose house Cervantes
had deposited the collected sums, caused his guarantor, the suspicious
Francisco Suárez Gasco, to summon him to court. Entrusted to notify
Cervantes of this order, Judge Vallejo sent him to the royal prison in
Seville, thus committing a veritable abuse of his power either by error
or through malice. This imprisonment, which over the course of several
months gave him the chance to engage at length with the colourful
underworld of the city, a parallel society with its own hierarchy, rules,
and slang, appeared to be the same one in which Don Quixote was
conceived, if we are to believe what he tells us in the prologue to its
first part: a prison ‘donde toda incomodidad tiene su asiento y donde
todo triste ruido hace su habitación’ [‘where every discomfort has its
seat and every dismal sound its room’].17 It could well have been here,
then, that there emerged at least the initial idea for a book which eight
years later would garner immediate success.
We do not know the exact date of Cervantes’s release; however, it
seems he bade farewell for good to Seville in the summer of 1600, just
as the terrible Black Death moved south after devastating Castile the
previous year. Meanwhile, on 13 September 1598, Philip II died, and a
poem in five-line stanzas attributed to Cervantes points out with
notable irony the financial disaster that cast a shadow over the final
years of his reign:
Quedar las arcas vacías
donde se encerraba el oro
que dicen que recogías,
nos muestra que tu tesoro
en el cielo lo escondías.18
[Empty the chests where the gold was locked up, the gold they say you
gathered, shows us that you were hiding your treasure in heaven.]
The Ingenious Gentleman
As has been noted, almost nothing is known of Cervantes’s life during
those crucial years in which he was composing the first part of Don
Quixote. It is very likely that in the summer of 1604 he moved with his
wife to Valladolid, which had been chosen by Philip III as the new
capital three years earlier. He re-joined his sisters and his daughter,
Isabel, who had lived in Madrid up until then, and he met a publisher
by the name of Francisco de Robles, son of Blas de Robles, publisher of
La Galatea. On 26 September he was granted the privilegio [royal
approval] that he required for printing, and news of the imminent
publication of his new book spread, as seen in a letter written by Lope
de Vega. In the final days of December 1604, Don Quixote emerged
from the presses of Juan de la Cuesta, with the first signs of its success
very soon evident. In March 1605, as Cervantes was obtaining a new
privilegio, extending beyond Castile to Portugal and Aragon, two pirate
editions were published in Lisbon, and the second Madrid edition hit
the presses, coming out that summer. Meanwhile the first shipments of
the princeps were registered in Seville and sent to the Indies. At the
same time, Don Quixote and Sancho appeared everywhere in festivities,
dances, and masquerades.
A short time later, at the end of June, our author strangely became
mixed up in the violent death of a gentleman of the Order of Santiago,
Gaspar de Ezpeleta. Wounded in a night-time duel, which took place in
the area of the city in which the writer and his family lived, Ezpeleta
was given shelter by Cervantes in his house and died two days later
without having confessed the name of his attacker. The investigation
undertaken by the local official resulted in depositions being collected
in the case, which are now preserved in the archives of the Real
Academia Española. They record the imprisonment of Cervantes for a
couple of days because of the insinuations by a female neighbour about
the behaviour of his sisters and daughter, and this information throws a
curious light on the life and livelihood of the writer and his relatives.
From Andrea de Cervantes’s deposition we can infer that her brother
was ‘un hombre que escribe e trata negocios, e que por su buena
habilidad tiene amigos’ [‘a man who writes and does business, and who
has friends as a result of his gifts’].19 Amongst these friends were a
Genoese supplier, Agustín Raggio, linked to a whole network of Italian
businessmen based in Genoa, Antwerp, and Madrid, and a Portuguese
financier, Simón Méndez, treasurer and chief tax-collector of the
marine tithes in Castile and Galicia. There was also a gentleman of the
chamber of Kings Philip II and Philip III, Fernando de Toledo, señor de
Higares, who was implicated in certain political projects that would
lead him to spend his fortune extravagantly. We can thus gradually,
even if in broad brush-strokes, learn something of the ‘other face’ of the
author of Don Quixote, in particular the fact that an ex-tax-collector
maintained relations with these representatives of the business
community, some of whom, because of their debts, had run-ins with the
law at a time when Castilian merchants were going under and some
Genoese were becoming spectacularly rich.
In the Capital
After the court’s return to Madrid in 1606, Cervantes settled with his
family in the Atocha district of the capital, behind the Antón Martín
Hospital, where we know he was living in February 1608. A year later
he moved to calle de la Magdalena, near the Duke of Pastrana’s palace,
and then to the calle de León in what was called the barrio de las Musas
[district of the Muses], home also to Lope de Vega, Francisco de
Quevedo, and Vélez de Guevara. At the start of 1612 he moved again,
though not far, to calle de las Huertas, behind the cemetery of San
Sebastián. Finally, in autumn of 1615, he abandoned this house for
another on the corner of calle de Francos and calle de León. During
these last eight years of his life, he did not often leave the capital,
except for brief trips to Alcalá and Esquivias. The only point at which
his destiny might have taken a different course was in the spring of
1610 when the Count of Lemos, his patron, was appointed Viceroy of
Naples. Cervantes, like Góngora, harboured dreams of forming part of
his literary court. From the evidence taken from Martín de Riquer’s
minute examination of the chapters in Don Quixote, Part II, which relate
the knight’s stay in Barcelona, it is possible to claim that he might have
undertaken a journey to that city in July to argue his case as Lemos
was about to depart.20 However, neither the viceroy’s secretary, the
poet Lupercio Leonardo de Argensola, nor his brother, Bartolomé, made
good on their promises.
These years are also marked by several family events. Cervantes had
disagreements with his daughter, Isabel, and successive sons-in-law,
Diego Sanz and Luis de Molina, over money and the ownership of a
house in calle de la Montera. His older sister, Andrea, died suddenly in
October 1609, and his granddaughter, Isabel Sanz, died six months
after that. His younger sister, Magdalena, died in January 1610. These
events might explain a change in Cervantes’s attitude to forms of
devotion and an increasing engagement with ritual practices. In April
1609, he affiliated himself to the Congregación de los Esclavos del
Santísimo Sacramento [Congregation of the Slaves of the Holy
Sacrament], although we cannot be certain whether he complied with
the strict rules that this body imposed on its members, such as fasting
and abstinence on prescribed days, daily attendance of services,
spiritual exercises, and hospital visits. In July 1613, he was admitted as
a novice to the Franciscan Tertiaries, as his wife and sisters had been,
and on 2 April 1616, shortly before his death, he took his vows.
Cervantes at work
What is most striking about these years, however, is Cervantes’s
definitive return to writing at a moment when his renown was starting
to spread beyond the Pyrenees. He took part in literary competitions
held by the Academia Selvaje, founded by Don Francisco de Silva y
Mendoza, with sessions taking place in his palace on the calle de
Atocha. This is where, one day in March 1612, Lope de Vega asked
Cervantes for his glasses so that he could read some of his verses. In the
poet’s words, they were glasses ‘que parecían guevos estrellados mal
hechos’ [‘which looked like badly made fried eggs’].21 New editions of
Don Quixote appeared in Brussels in 1607 and Madrid in 1608; Thomas
Shelton went to press with The Delightful History of the Valorous and
Witty Knight-Errant Don Quixote of the Mancha, an enjoyable English
version, which appeared in 1612; and in 1611, César Oudin began what
would become a four-year task to render the novel into French.
Meanwhile, Cervantes had just completed the composition of the
twelve works that would make up the Novelas ejemplares, some of
which—Rinconete y Cortadillo and El celoso extremeño, for example—
were most probably written during the time he spent in Andalusia, and
with others apparently dating from his time in Valladolid. Judging by
allusions to the court’s return to Madrid and the growing hostility
towards the moriscos, expelled in 1609, we can conjecture that others
are later works. However, the chronology of the novels cannot be
established with much certainty. Official approval having been
obtained in July 1612, the volume emerged from the printing presses of
Juan de la Cuesta the following July with a dedication to the Count of
Lemos, whom Cervantes had hoped to accompany to Italy. The
prologue is worthy of special attention since it contains the verbal self-
portrait of a writer whose face was never painted during his lifetime:22
Éste que veis aquí, de rostro aguileño, de cabello castaño, frente lisa y
desembarazada, de alegres ojos y de nariz corva, aunque bien
proporcionada; las barbas de plata, que no ha veinte años que fueron de
oro, los bigotes grandes, la boca pequeña, los dientes ni menudos ni
crecidos, porque no tiene sino seis…; el cuerpo entre dos extremos, ni
grande, ni pequeño, la color viva, antes blanca que morena; algo
cargado de espaldas y no muy ligero de pies; este, digo, que es el rostro
del autor de La Galatea y de Don Quijote de la Mancha.23
[This man you see here, with aquiline face, chestnut hair, smooth,
unwrinkled brow, joyful eyes, and curved though well-proportioned
nose; silvery beard which not twenty years ago was golden, large
moustache, small mouth, teeth neither small nor large, since he has
only six…; of middling height, neither tall nor short, fresh-faced, rather
fair than dark; somewhat stooping and none too light on his feet; this, I
say, is the likeness of the author of La Galatea and Don Quixote de la
Mancha.]
Cervantes went through this creative phase just when the passion for
the theatre that he had experienced since adolescence had taken over
the whole country. The theatres had been closed for several months
upon the death of Philip II, but after the court had returned to Madrid
they re-opened, creating the conditions in which playwrights and
actors, who were behind the theatrical productions on a truly massive
scale, were to give a large boost to the world of the theatre.
With the support of a cohort of disciples, Lope de Vega had become
the idol of both the masses and the educated elite with his fecundity
and his inventiveness. In 1605, through the mouths of the canon and
the priest, Cervantes had reproached Lope, without actually naming
him, for the crowd-pleasing simplicity of his drama. Now, if we are to
make judgements based on what we are told at the start of Act II of El
rufián dichoso, he appears to admit that ‘los tiempos mudan las cosas y
perficionan las artes’ [‘time changes things and perfects the arts’].
However, one should not exaggerate the extent of the change he had
undergone, since ‘añadir a lo inventado no es dificultad notable’ [‘to
add to what has been invented is not very difficult’].24 While
recognizing at the end of his life that Lope de Vega had managed to
dominate this world and put ‘debajo de su jurisdicción a todos los
farsantes’ [‘the whole acting profession under his jurisdiction’],25 Lope’s
monarchy appeared to Cervantes to be akin to that of a skilful
businessman. The success of his theatrical product was the result of its
perfect adaptation to the predominant tastes of the time.
Cervantes’s misgivings faced with the Lopean comedia allow us to
make sense of the rejection he had experienced since his return to
Madrid at the hands of the theatre professionals, the all-powerful
autores de comedias [actor-managers], who refused to include in their
repertory the works he had written after returning to his ‘antigua
ociosidad’ [‘former leisure’].26 His disappointment is evident, and he
expresses it movingly in the prologue to his Ocho comedias:
Pensando que aún duraban los siglos donde corrían mis alabanzas, volví
a componer algunas comedias; pero no hallé pájaros en los nidos de
antaño; quiero decir que no hallé autor que me las pidiese, puesto que
sabían que las tenía, y así las arrinconé en un cofre y las consagré y
condené al perpetuo silencio.
[Thinking that the times when my stock was high were still with us, I
went back to writing plays. But I found no birds in the nests of
yesteryear; I mean I found no actor-manager who would ask me for the
plays, though they knew I had them and so I put them away in a trunk
and gave them up and condemned them to everlasting silence.]27
This explains his decision to dispense with actors. Instead of having his
plays performed, he published them, offering them up to an avid
reading audience ‘para que se vea de espacio lo que pasa apriesa, y se
disimula, o no se entiende, cuando las representan’ [‘so that they can
see at their leisure what happens rapidly, or is missed or not picked up
when they are performed’].28 In September 1615, this unusual decision,
which, running counter to established practice, upset the usual means
of diffusion, came to fruition: the bookseller, Juan de Villarroel, put on
sale a volume significantly titled Ocho comedias, y ocho entremeses
nuevos, nunca representados.
Avellaneda
What would be a bigger undertaking in this period was the
continuation of the adventures of Quixote and Sancho, a second part of
which was advertised by the author at the end of the first with the
promise that the last sally of the ingenious gentleman would end with
his death. It tends to be claimed that Cervantes began this composition
a few months after his return to Madrid, perhaps at the behest of
Robles, but had to stop working on it on several occasions in order to
conclude the other works that he had underway. In the prologue to the
Novelas ejemplares, written in 1612 and published in 1613, Cervantes
informed his readers that they would see ‘con brevedad dilatadas, las
hazañas de don Quijote y donaires de Sancho Panza’ [‘very shortly the
further exploits of Don Quixote and more quips from Sancho Panza’].29
A year later, in Chapter 36, he dates a letter written by Sancho to his
wife, Teresa, 20 June 1614. During the summer, in little more than two
months, he writes no fewer than twenty-three chapters. It is at this
juncture that the bookseller, Felipe Roberto, publishes, in Tarragona,
the Segundo tomo de las aventuras del ingenioso hidalgo Don Quixote de la
Mancha, written by the licentiate Alonso Fernández de Avellaneda from
Tordesillas.
This was not the first time that a successful book had spawned
imitations. In the sixteenth century, the Celestina, Lazarillo de Tormes,
and Montemayor’s La Diana had all inspired continuations with
differing degrees of faithfulness to the original. More recently, Mateo
Luján de Sayavedra had brought out a Segunda parte del Guzmán de
Alfarache [Second part of Guzmán de Alfarache], while Mateo Alemán
was working towards the conclusion of his own. This apocryphal
Quixote was the product of fraud, evident from the use of a false
printer’s name and place of publication. What is more, ‘Avellaneda’ was
nothing more than a mask, behind which was concealed an unknown
person, whose name remains a mystery even today.
Some years ago, Martín de Riquer found a clue from a number of
indications—habits of writing, errors and stylistic infelicities, repeated
reference to the rosary—which pointed to Jerónimo de Pasamonte, a
soldier and writer who seems to have inspired the character of the
galley slave, Ginés de Pasamonte in I.32, and who turns into Maese
Pedro, the famous puppeteer in Part II.30 Jerónimo de Pasamonte from
Aragon, runs the argument, would have served Lope de Vega with his
pen in order to leave Cervantes high and dry. However, as the late
Edward Riley pointed out, this hypothesis lacks the evidence necessary
to support it.31 Whoever wrote the novel, Avellaneda’s prologue,
attributed by some to Lope de Vega, caused Cervantes deep hurt. It
attempted to bring him down a peg or two, inviting him to show more
modesty, as well as mocking him for his age and accusing him, above
all, of being ‘más lengua que manos’ [‘all talk and no action’]. It
concluded thus: ‘Conténtese con su Galatea y comedias en prosa, que
eso son las más de sus Novelas: no nos canse’ [‘Be content with his
Galatea and his plays in prose, because that’s what most of his novelas
are: let him put an end to his tiresome writing’].32
Cervantes responded to these accusations in a dignified manner in
his Part II: first, in the prologue, he defended the loss of his hand,
originating ‘en la más alta ocasión que vieron los siglos pasados, los
presentes, ni esperan ver los venideros’ [‘in the greatest battle that past
or present ages have ever seen or that future ages can ever hope to
see’];33 then, within the story itself, he has Don Quixote flick through
Avellaneda’s book at an inn when he bumps into two of its readers who
are disappointed by the nonsense they have just read. Finally, he
incorporated into the plot of his own book one of the characters
invented by the plagiarist—Don Álvaro Tarfe—giving him the
opportunity to meet the true Don Quixote and learn that Avellaneda’s
hero was passing himself off as someone else. This last episode occurs
just before the final real adventures of the knight. By January 1615, the
last chapters of the book were complete, and at the end of October, the
prologue and dedication to the Count of Lemos were also written. At
the very end of November, the Segunda Parte del Ingenioso Caballero Don
Quixote de la Mancha, por Miguel de Cervantes, autor de su primera parte
was published; a second part ‘cortada del mismo artífice y del mesmo
paño que la primera’ [‘cut by the same craftsman and from the same
cloth as the first one’], but in a story ‘dilatado’ [‘prolonged’] with its
new adventures, that is to say, extended, brought to its conclusion, and
also expanded.34 This was a second part that brought the novel to
perfection, assuring it an immediate acclaim, one which has been
confirmed by posterity.
An anecdote reproduced in his ‘approval’ of the novel by the
licentiate Francisco Márquez Torres, one of the censors of Part II,
provides evidence of the renown which Cervantes enjoyed beyond the
Pyrenees. In February 1615, some French gentlemen who were
accompanying the ambassador Sillery were sent to Spain to negotiate
the union between Louis XIII and Anne of Austria. They received a visit
from Cardinal Sandoval y Rojas, Cervantes’s patron. On learning of the
role that Márquez Torres was undertaking:
Apenas oyeron el nombre de Miguel de Cervantes, cuando se
comenzaron a hacer lenguas, encareciendo la estimación que así en
Francia como en los reinos sus confinantes se tenía de sus obras: la
Galatea, que alguno dellos tiene casi de memoria, la primera parte
désta, y las Novelas…. Preguntáronme muy por menor de su edad, su
profesión, calidad y cantidad. Halléme obligado a decir que era viejo,
soldado, hidalgo y pobre.35
[Hardly had they heard the name of Cervantes than they all began to
speak at once, insisting on the esteem in which his works were held in
France and its neighbouring realms: the Galatea, that one of them
knows almost by heart; the first part of this work; and the Novels…They
asked me in great detail about his age, his profession, his status and his
prosperity. I had to let them know that he was old, a soldier, an hidalgo
and poor.]
From this testimony, we cannot be certain about the financial situation
of the writer. The notarial documents from this time that contain his
signature demonstrate that he still had business interests. This fact
causes us to question the supposed poverty, which has been taken
literally up until now, but which might be, at least in part, a truism
solemnly repeated by biographers.
Final Days and Death
In the last few months of his life, Cervantes dedicated his remaining
strength to concluding another undertaking that he had begun much
earlier, perhaps whilst in Andalusia, and that he had postponed for
years. Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda, ‘a northern story’, took as its
model the ancient Greek novel. The genre had been rediscovered by the
Humanists in the Renaissance, who had adapted or translated into
Spanish Heliodorus’s Aethiopica and Achilles Tatius’s Leucippe and
Clitophon. These works allowed the imagination to open up by two
different means—the unexpected and chance or surprise—to what
Aristotle called in his theory of verisimilitude ‘things that might
happen’. After promising the Persiles year after year in the prologue to
the Novelas ejemplares, Viaje del Parnaso, and the dedication to the
second part of Don Quixote, Cervantes completed its composition four
days before he died. It is his widow who hands over the manuscript to
Villaroel, who would publish it posthumously in January of 1617.
On 18 April 1616, Cervantes is known to have been on his death
bed, and he received the last rites. The unquenchable thirst to which he
himself refers is probably a symptom of diabetes, a terminal illness in
the period, and not the dropsy diagnosed by the student whom he met
on his journey to Madrid, if we are to believe what Cervantes tells us in
the prologue to the Persiles. The day after the last rites are
administered, he takes advantage of a moment of relief to direct an
admirable dedication to the Count of Lemos:
Aquellas coplas antiguas, que fueron en su tiempo celebradas, que
comienzan: «Puesto ya el pie en el estribo», quisiera yo no vinieran tan
a pelo en esta mi epístola, porque casi con las mismas palabras la puedo
comenzar, diciendo: «Puesto ya el pie en el estribo / Con las ansias de
la muerte, / Gran señor, ésta te escribo». Ayer me dieron la
Extremaunción, y hoy escribo ésta. El tiempo es breve, las ansias
crecen, las esperanzas menguan, y con todo esto, llevo la vida sobre el
deseo que tengo de vivir.
[Those ancient verses that were once famous and that begin, ‘With my
foot now in the stirrup’. I wish they were not so relevant to my epistle
for I can start it with almost the same words, saying, ‘With my foot now
in the stirrup / in the final torment of death, / my lord, I write you
this’. Yesterday I received the last rites and today I am writing this
letter. Time is short, the torment grows, hopes wane, and yet, I desire
nothing more than to live.]36
On 19 April he dictated in one attempt the prologue to the Persiles, and
after bidding farewell to the student clad all in brown with whom he
claims to have shared a journey, he concludes with words to the reader:
Mi vida se va acabando y al paso de las efemérides de mis pulsos, que, a
más tardar, acabarán su carrera este domingo, acabaré yo la de mi
vida.…Adiós gracias; adiós donaires; adiós, regocijados amigos: que yo
me voy muriendo, y deseando veros presto contentos en la otra vida.
[My life is ebbing away, and at the rate my heart is beating it will have
run its course by this Sunday at the latest, and with it the course of my
life will be run…Farewell sweet things, farewell pleasures, farewell
delightful friends, for I am slowly dying and hoping to see you before
long, happy, in the next life.]37
On Friday, 22 April, Miguel de Cervantes breathed his last. The next
day, in the register of his parish, San Sebastián, his death is recorded as
having occurred on Saturday 23 April, following the custom of the
period of alluding only to the day of the funeral. This is the date that is
remembered today and on which Book Day is celebrated annually in
Spain. Cervantes was interred in the Trinitarian monastery, according
to the rule of the Tertiaries, with his face exposed and dressed in the
Franciscans’ coarse wool. However, his remains were scattered at the
end of the seventeenth century when the monastery was reconstructed
and, in spite of very recent attempts to locate them, their discovery still
cannot be claimed with any certainty, and his will is lost. There
certainly remain the works of this ‘raro inventor’ [‘unusual creator’], as
he calls himself in the Viaje del Parnaso, whose Don Quixote turned him
into a legend.
Works Cited
Astrana Marín, Luis. Vida ejemplar y heroica de Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra, 7
vols. (Madrid: Instituto Editorial Reus, 1948–58).
Avalle-Arce, J.B., ‘La captura de Cervantes’. Boletín de la Real Academia
Española, XLVIII (1968): pp. 237–80; republished in Nuevos deslindes
cervantinos (Ariel, Barcelona, 1975), pp. 277–333.
Byron, William. Cervantes: A Biography (Garden City: Doubleday, 1978).
Canavaggio, Jean. Cervantes, translated by J.R. Jones (New York: Norton,
1990).
Castro, Américo. Cervantes y los casticismos españoles (Barcelona: Alfaguara,
1967).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Comedias y tragedias, edited by Luis Gómez Canseco, 2
vols. (Madrid: Real Academia Española, 2015).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Don Quijote de la Mancha, edited by Francisco Rico, 2
vols. (Madrid: Real Academia Española, 2015).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Don Quixote, translated by John Rutherford (London:
Penguin, 2000).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Los trabajos de Persiles y Segismunda, edited by Isabel
Lozano-Renieblas and Laura Fernández (Madrid: Real Academia Española,
2017).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Novelas ejemplares, edited by Jorge García López (Madrid:
Real Academia Española, 2013).
Cervantes, Miguel de. The Complete Exemplary Novels, edited by Barry Ife and
Jonathan Thacker (Oxford: Aris and Phillips, 2013).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Viaje del Parnaso y poesías sueltas, edited by José Montero
Reguera and Fernando Romo Feito (Madrid: Real Academia Española 2016).
Domínguez Ortiz, A. ‘La España del Quijote’. In Don Quijote de la Mancha by
Miguel de Cervantes, edited by Francisco Rico, vol. I (Barcelona: Instituto
Cervantes, 1998).
Fernández de Avellaneda, Alonso. Segunda Parte del ingenioso hidalgo Don Quijote
de la Mancha, edited by Luis Gómez Canseco (Madrid: Anejos de la Real
Academia Española, 2014).
Haedo, Diego de. Topographía e historia general de Argel, edited by de Ignacio
Bauer and Landauer, 3 vols. (Madrid: Sociedad de Bibliófilos Españoles,
1927–9).
Lafuente Ferrari, E. La novela ejemplar de los retratos de Cervantes (Madrid:
Dossat, 1948).
López Baralt, Luce. ‘El tal de Shaibedraa (Don Quijote I, 40)’. eHumanista/
Cervantes 2 (2013): pp. 404–26.
McCrory, Donald. No Ordinary Man: The Life and Times of Miguel de Cervantes
(London, Peter Owen, 2002).
Predmore, Richard L. Cervantes (New York: Dodd, Mead, & Co., 1973).
Riley, E.C. ‘¿Quién era Pasamonte?’. In Actas del III Congreso Internacional de la
Asociación de Cervantistas, edited by A. Bernat Vistarini (Palma de Mallorca:
Universitat de les Illes Balears, 1998), pp. 85–96.
Riquer, M. de. Cervantes en Barcelona (Barcelona: Sirmio, 1989).
Riquer, M. de. Cervantes, Passamonte y Avellaneda (Barcelona: Sirmio, 1988).
Sliwa, K. Documentos de Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra (Pamplona: Eunsa, 1999).
Sliwa, K. ‘Semblanza documental de Miguel de Cervantes’. In ReTrato de Miguel
de Cervantes Saavedra, edited by Florencio Sevilla Arroyo (Guanajuato: Museo
Iconográfico del Quijote, 2011), pp. 130–52.
1 Castro, p. 169n. All translations into English have been done by the
translators of this chapter unless otherwise noted.
2 Domínguez Ortiz, p. 231.
3 This description was applied by Tamayo de Vargas in his catalogue of
Spanish books, Junta de libros, la mayor que ha visto España, hasta el otoño de
1624. However, it had circulated before that date, since Cervantes himself
alludes to it in Chapter VI of his Viaje del Parnaso (Viaje del Parnaso y poesías
sueltas, p. 97).
4 This information comes from a royal dispatch discovered in the nineteenth
century in the Simancas archives. Judging by the contents of the document, the
guilty party, a certain ‘Miguel de Zerbantes, student’, had fled to Seville having
been condemned in his absence to have his right hand publicly cut off and to a
ten-year exile from the kingdom. However, Sliwa has drawn attention to the
baptismal records of two men of the same name—one the son of Miguel López
de Cervantes and Lucía Alonso and the other of Blas de Cervantes Saavedra and
Catalina López—born in the same decade and in neighbouring towns (Sliwa,
‘Semblanza documental…’, p. 107).
5 Testimony of Mateo de Santisteban, on 20 March 1578 (Sliwa,
Documentos…, p. 51).
6 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I, p. 673.
7 Cervantes, Don Quixote, p. 483.
8 See Avalle-Arce, pp. 237–80.
9 Haedo, vol. III, p. 165.
10 Testimony of Diego Castellano, 10 October 1580, in Sliwa, Documentos…,
p. 81.
11 Cervantes, Comedias y tragedias, I, p. 12.
12 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, p. 555; The Complete Exemplary Novels, p.
xxxi.
13 Cervantes, Comedias y tragedias, I, p. 12.
14 Sliwa, Documentos…, pp. 225–6.
15 Sliwa, Documentos…, pp. 255–6.
16 See López Baralt, pp. 404–26.
17 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I, p. 9; Don Quixote, p. 11.
18 Cervantes, Viaje del Parnaso…, p. 223.
19 Sliwa, Documentos…, p. 327.
20 See Riquer, Cervantes en Barcelona.
21 Sliwa, Documentos…, p. 354.
22 The portrait ascribed to Jáuregui is clearly inspired by this self-portrait. It
was probably done at the beginning of the twentieth century by a forger by the
name of José Albiol. The portrait discovered in the collections of the Marquis of
Casa Torres is from the period but is not of Cervantes. It is in fact of Don Diego
Mesía de Ovando, Count of Uceda. See Lafuente Ferrari.
23 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, p. 16; The Complete Exemplary Novels, p.
xxxi.
24 Cervantes, Comedias y tragedias, I, p. 13.
25 Cervantes, Comedias y tragedias, I, p. 12.
26 Cervantes, Comedias y tragedias, I, p. 12.
27 Cervantes, Comedias y tragedias, I, p. 13.
28 Cervantes, Viaje del Parnaso…, p. 135.
29 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, p. 20; The Complete Exemplary Novels, p.
xxxiii.
30 See Riquer, Cervantes, Passamonte y Avellaneda.
31 Riley, pp. 85–96.
32 Fernández de Avellaneda, p. 8.
33 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I, p. 673; Don Quixote, p. 483.
34 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I, p. 677; Don Quixote, p. 486.
35 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I, p. 668.
36 Cervantes, Los Trabajos…, p. 11.
37 Cervantes, Los Trabajos…, p. 14.
Chapter 2
Cervantes and Warfare
Stacey Triplette
University of Pittsburgh at Greensburg
Miguel de Cervantes travelled the Mediterranean as a professional
soldier, fought in the battle of Lepanto in 1571, and endured five years
in captivity in Algiers before he published his first literary work, the
pastoral novel La Galatea, in 1585. References to warfare appear
throughout Cervantes’s literary production, serving as a metaphor,
background, or interpolation, even in texts that concern themselves
primarily with civilian life. Though Cervantes celebrates his personal
career as a soldier, he subjects the theme of warfare more generally to
the irony and distance with which he treats other cultural phenomena
of early modern Spain. La destrucción de Numancia (c.1583) ponders the
injustices of an ancient siege, bringing into question both the
traditional Spanish identification with the doomed Celtiberian
defenders and the justice of Spain’s own imperial project, ideologically
parallel to that of the Romans in the play. Don Quixote, Part I (1605)
evokes the same issues with the addition of early modern technology,
asking whether heroism and chivalric values have any place in the
gunpowder-enabled warfare of the Golden Age. In turn, certain
interpolated tales in Don Quixote and select Novelas ejemplares (1613)
consider the civilian consequences of war. In all his texts, Cervantes
expresses a concern for justice in military action. For the individual
soldier, citizen, or knight-errant, personal heroism and correct
behaviour appear to be possible, but on the scale of the nation, warfare
leads inevitably to financial opportunism and human suffering.
War in Spain’s mythic past: La Numancia
Cervantes’s tragedy La destrucción de Numancia predates Don Quixote by
two decades, but its treatment of warfare anticipates later meditations
on the gap between military and civilian life. In La Numancia, the
suicide of an entire population is the needless consequence of an
improperly conducted war. Cipión and the Romans fail to engage the
Numantians in fair combat, and the apocalyptic result is no more
gratifying to the conquerors than the conquered. The precise date of
the first performance of La Numancia is unknown, but Alfredo Baras
Escolá estimates it as between 1583 and 1585, approximately
contemporary with the publication of La Galatea.1 The play is based on
the famous siege of the Celtiberian city of Numancia in 133 bc by
Scipio Aemilianus. The events of Numancia had become legendary in
Spain by the time Cervantes composed his tragedy, and as Aaron M.
Kahn explains: ‘The defence of Numancia and its inhabitants’ final self-
sacrifice to preserve their honour and their liberty against a foreign
invader caused sixteenth-century Spaniards to admire and to relate
themselves to their ancient forefathers.’2 La Numancia represents both
sides of the siege, beginning with Cipión’s reform of his troops’
behaviour and his plan to blockade the Numantians into submission. In
the subsequent jornadas, the focus shifts to the interior of the city,
where hunger and desperation rule. The virtuous Numantians choose
murder-suicide as their end, with the men slaying their beloved wives
and children before taking their own lives, but most of the violence
takes place off stage. La Numancia is about the ‘human consequences’ of
war, and the characters’ suffering represents the ‘loss of pure love’
(Marandro and Lira) and ‘the loss of friendship’ (Marandro and
Leoncio) on a civic scale.3
To a modern reader, Cipión’s strategy of protracted blockade might
seem sensible or even humane; the technique preserves Roman soldiers’
lives, and the starving Numantians have the option to surrender. In the
second jornada of the play, the Numantian Teóganes refers to his own
group as ‘varones esforzados’ [‘valiant men’] in contrast to the cowards
on the Roman side:
Tiénennos los romanos encerrados
y con cobardes mañas nos destruyen;
ni con matar muriendo no hay vengarnos
ni podemos sin alas escaparnos.
[The Romans have us closed in and destroy us with cowardly tricks; dying,
we cannot avenge ourselves by killing nor without wings escape.]4
In order to understand the Numantians’ criticism of the Romans within
the play as cowardly or unjust, one has to place La Numancia’s
representation of warfare within both its classical and sixteenth century
contexts. Though Cervantes is writing about an historical event, the
way he does so is constrained by the models of ancient and early
modern epic. Cervantes makes extensive reference to Virgil’s Aeneid
(c.19 bc), a privileged intertext for the representation of warfare in the
early modern era. He does not, however, cite Virgil exclusively in
support of the project of empire; much of what David Quint observes
about the representation of the ‘losers’ of classical epic is true of La
Numancia. Marandro and Leoncio’s doomed excursus into the Roman
camp imitates Virgil’s famous episode of Nisus and Euryalus, and the
Duero’s speech about the future of Iberia echoes Dido’s dying
prediction that a redeemer (Hannibal) will rise from her lineage to
challenge the might of Rome. Lucan’s Pharsalia (AD 65), an influential
text for the Iberian context, is usually classified among the epics that
align themselves with the defeated and is also a potential source for La
Numancia.5 What is most interesting about the use of epic in
Cervantes’s play is that the double identity of the Celtiberans in history
—they are immediate losers but eventual winners—complicates the
usual epic characterizations of victor and vanquished. Though the
depiction of defeat in La Numancia provides what Quint would term ‘a
rival narrative of resistance coexisting alongside the triumphalist
history’, both winners and losers can be ideologically identified with
Spain, complicating the issue.6 The binary between winners and losers
breaks down, as the play both praises Spain and criticizes the project of
empire.
More modern representations of warfare might also have factored
into La Numancia. Alonso de Ercilla’s epic of conquest in the New
World, La Araucana (1569–89), had broad appeal in Spain and was
saved from destruction in the scrutiny of books in Don Quixote’s library
in I.6. Moreover, Cervantes might reasonably be thought to have drawn
on two Italian chivalric epics, Matteo Boiardo’s Orlando Innamorato
(1483–95) and Ludovico Ariosto’s Orlando Furioso (1515); Orlando
Furioso in particular garners many specific mentions in Don Quixote.
Both Orlando Innamorato and Orlando Furioso feature the Saracen king
Agramante’s siege of Paris, and the protracted stalemate in these Italian
texts might well have influenced Cervantes. As Michael Murrin
explains, the siege had a special place in sixteenth century war
writing.7 While the siege was a frequent tactic in medieval as well as
early modern military campaigns, medieval chivalric romance rarely
represents sieges, as ‘knights had little to do in a siege’.8 In early
modern Iberian texts, writers use various techniques to add interest to
long sieges. Garci Rodríguez de Montalvo, arguably the most influential
of Iberian chivalric writers, pulls individual characters out of the siege
of Constantinople in Las Sergas de Esplandián (1505) for one-on-one
duels. La Araucana contains a siege at Penco in which Mapuche
attackers greatly outnumber Spanish defenders. Instead of depicting the
chaotic movements of an army, Ercilla turns his narrative focus to the
heroic actions of individuals.
La Numancia, however, presents a siege without relief; characters
talk about Marandro and Leoncio’s heroic sortie into the Roman camp,
but the public does not see it. The play’s tragic ending reinforces the
sense of enclosure that permeates the entire work. Though the Romans
make a show of offering clemency to the last Numantian survivor,
Bariato, they may not be entirely trustworthy; the Romans may simply
want a prisoner to serve as an example to other populations who resist.
It would not be usual practice to show mercy to a vanquished
population at the end of a long and costly siege. Writing about the
campaigns of the medieval Iberian Reconquest, which would have been
familiar to Cervantes and his sixteenth-century public, Lomax explains
that ‘if the citizens of a Muslim town surrendered immediately, they
would usually be allowed to stay there and keep their lives, religion,
and property; if they surrendered during the siege they were allowed to
depart with their lives and what they could carry; if they did not
surrender and their city was stormed then they were either killed or
enslaved’.9 As a form of resistance to siege, however, mass suicide is
difficult to understand or interpret.
The Numantians’ defiant self-sacrifice indicates that they care about
more than physical survival. They adhere to a code of honour, and the
mode in which they express this value is essentially chivalric.
According to Murrin, the war writers of early modern Europe, including
Boiardo, Ariosto, Camões, and Ercilla, partook of military customs that
descended from medieval chivalric romance. Notions of honour,
especially for warriors, and especially for men, are closely related to
the chivalric code. Chivalry emphasizes personal bravery and fairness
in military encounters whether at the personal or collective level.
Maurice Keen defines chivalry as an ‘ethos in which martial,
aristocratic, and Christian elements were fused together’.10 Often
described as an order analogous to religious orders, medieval chivalry
had strict ties to notions of aristocracy and lineage and promoted a
predictable set of virtues, including prowess, loyalty, generosity,
courtesy, and frankness.11 The medieval chivalric code established rules
for fair engagement between opposing parties, emphasizing personal
heroism [esfuerzo] and shunning any notion of fraud.12 Chivalric
fictions prefer one-on-one combat on conditions of equality. For just
one example, when Amadís de Gaula, Don Quixote’s idol, duels another
knight, the battle progresses through recognizable stages. After a
formal challenge, opponents proceed from a joust on horseback to
fighting with swords on foot. If the sword of one or both parties breaks,
the knights wrestle or trade blows with their fists. The duel ends only
when one combatant dies, yields, or loses consciousness.13 Such battles
are ritual events, and in chivalric fictions, right makes might; a knight
cannot prevail against an opponent whose moral cause is superior.
Edwin Williamson refers to chivalric combat as ‘a virtually automatic
decoder of identities, motives, and spiritual states’; victory in battle
points unerringly to the truth.14
In La Numancia a superior moral cause will not lead to victory, but
the intervention of the chivalric code in the text nevertheless makes the
Numantian defenders’ actions more intelligible. When Numantian
emissaries treat with the Romans early in the play, they attempt to
negotiate a substitute for the siege in the form of an organized battle,
essentially a chivalric duel among a defined group of combatants.15
Romances of chivalry provide many examples of such arranged melees.
When Cipión’s party refuses, the Numantians accuse them of
cowardice; chivalry prefers fair battles in which the strength of
individuals rather than sheer numbers decides the outcome. The
chivalric virtue esfuerzo appears twice in La Numancia, and both sides
believe that they embody it. When Cipión forces his troops to lead
abstemious lives, as the historical Scipio Aemilianus did, he argues that
the physical force of an army must be accompanied by ‘esfuerzo y
cordura’ [‘valor and reason’].16 Because the Romans will not fight,
however, they cannot be considered to have esfuerzo. The personified
España of the play calls the Romans ‘tímidos’, as opposed to the
‘varones esforzados’ of Numancia.17 The Numantians ultimately express
their valour as self-sacrifice, and in the terms of the play, Numantian
suicide constitutes an ideological defeat for the Romans. The notion of
the Roman victory as incomplete depends, at least in part, on the
intervention of the chivalric code. Historical conquerors might not
regard the death of an entire population as a loss, but in the play, the
city’s collective suicide negates any glory Cipión and the Romans might
have earned as conquerors. In Emilie Bergmann’s words, the Romans
‘know they have won nothing’ when they invade an empty city.18 The
Romans might have hoped to increase their own fame, but the play
makes clear that all glory belongs to the vanquished. After killing his
own children, the Numantian Teógenes boasts: ‘ni el romano poderío /
llevará de vosotros triunfo o palma’ [‘the Roman power / will not take
from you the triumph or victor’s palm’].19 In chivalric texts, the
reputation or fame characters gain from brave deeds is often just as
important as those deeds in themselves; the victor’s palm—here also a
martyr’s palm—is not a trivial concern. The death of the citizens is an
embarrassment for Cipión, while the fame of the Numantians will live
on ‘en prosa y verso’ [‘in verse and prose’].20
In this text, a just war must be a fair war, with comparable numbers
and without fraud. La Numancia may use ancient rather than modern
military technology, but it nonetheless resonates with the military
campaigns of Cervantes’s own day. The text’s praise for Spain may
appear to support the ideological project of Spanish empire, but critics
in recent years have emphasized La Numancia’s ambiguities. For
Barbara Simerka, ‘Spain itself is indeterminate, the sign which refers
simultaneously to the morally victorious Numantians and to the
decadent Roman Empire, its achievements in the early modern period
shown to be both epic victories and tragic slaughters.’21 Cervantes
questions both the ideology of imperial conquest and Spain’s
relationship to that ideology in La Numancia, and in later texts, the
subversive undertones of his representation of the institution of warfare
become even more pronounced.
Early Modern War
In the sixteenth century, armies in both the Mediterranean and the
Americas encountered a technological revolution in the form of the
widespread use of gunpowder. Though Europeans used gunpowder as
early as the fourteenth century, it was not until the sixteenth century
that it began to play a decisive role in military campaigns.22 Bert Hall
argues that the changes gunpowder brought corresponded with shifts in
shifts in military techniques that date to the Middle Ages; infantry and
missile weapons had become important long before the use of artillery
or firearms became widespread.23 By the sixteenth century, changes to
the production of gunpowder and the weapons that used it made
gunpowder warfare practical and relatively cost effective.24
Over time, gunpowder changed the character of military campaigns,
resulting in longer sieges, larger armies, and a more democratic and
extensive recruitment process.25 Stephen Rupp explains that firearms
brought with them tactics that required more soldiers than in previous
eras: ‘efficient use of small firearms depended on a disciplined order of
fire, particularly the tactic of successive volleys that enabled parallel
ranks of musketeers to fire, countermarch, load, and fire again as they
advanced on the enemy’.26 Armies turned to infantry from cavalry,
recruiting common soldiers who were subject to new forms of training
and from whom were expected alternate modes of heroism.27 The
collective, anonymous version of warfare gunpowder enabled in the
sixteenth century was the antithesis of the chivalric values that
continued to influence both cultural codes and literary texts.28 For
some writers, the era of gunpowder initiated a turn towards classical
epic, with its heroic hand-to-hand combat, as a model for warfare, as
opposed to the romance of chivalry, with its dependence on warriors on
horseback. Others criticized the new tools of war. In his study of early
modern epic, Michael Murrin finds that virtually all fifteenth- and
sixteenth-century poets engaged in ‘a negative critique of the gun’; they
disliked the fact that deaths could occur almost at random and the
weak could kill the strong.29 Cervantes follows this trend.
Like the epic poet Alonso de Ercilla, Cervantes was an eyewitness to
and participant in the wars of the Spanish Empire and the critiques of
technology he undertakes in his literary works originate, at least in
part, from personal experience. The young Cervantes left Madrid for
Rome and enlisted in the Spanish army sometime between 1568 and
1572.30 Scholars do not believe that he took part in campaigns in
Cyprus (the setting for El amante liberal) but the fact that he fought at
the sea battle of Lepanto in 1571 is beyond doubt.31 The great Christian
victory at Lepanto appeared at first to have ‘few consequences’, but
Fernand Braudel argues that the battle was the tipping point in the
decline of Turkish supremacy in the Mediterranean.32 Lepanto was
fought at almost unprecedented scale: the Holy League, comprised of
Catholic states in the Mediterranean including Spain and Venice,
gathered a fleet of more than three hundred ships carrying at least
eighty thousand personnel.33 Cervantes served as a harquebusier
[arcabucero] aboard the galley La Marquesa and received three
harquebus wounds during the encounter, two minor ones to the chest
and a major one to the left hand.34 After Lepanto, he continued his
military service, traveling, as Ruy Pérez de Viedma does in Don Quixote,
to Navarino, Tunis, and the fortress of La Goleta, though he was not
present during its fall. In 1575, on Cervantes’s journey home to Spain,
the renegade Arnaute Mamí captured his vessel, and he was taken to
Algiers, where he was held captive for five years.35 Cervantes mentions
Arnaute Mamí briefly in Don Quixote, Part I, La Galatea, and La española
inglesa; Don Quixote includes a metaliterary description of the author as
a captive.36
Cervantes’s writing contains extensive references to his career as a
soldier, and he frequently features the galley, artillery, and the
harquebus. Galleys are long, narrow warships with both sails and rows
of oars. Their shape facilitates boarding, and artillery could be mounted
on deck and used to disable enemy ships enough to permit a raiding
party to cross over. The heavily armed Christian galleasses [galeazas]
were one of the deciding factors for Christian victory at Lepanto.37
Turnbull defines the galleass as a galley ‘of double the usual size,
higher built and with overhead protection for their oarsmen, and larger
and more numerous guns in their bows’.38 Battles took place near shore
and were often amphibious. The goal was to capture enemy ships and
their contents rather than to sink rival ships with cannon fire.
Consequently, the naval strategies of such battles were transferrable to
acts of piracy.39
Like the historical Cervantes, the soldier characters in his works are
armed with the harquebus. Bert Hall describes the harquebus as a gun
with ‘a very long barrel…and a very small bore…Its breech was closed,
making it a muzzleloader, and it was mounted on a stock that both
supported the long barrel and projected a short way behind the breech,
which allowed the user to hold it in a number of ways’.40 The
harquebus required a lock mechanism in order to ignite the
gunpowder; many versions used a trigger that lowered a slow-burning
match.
La española inglesa offers a glimpse of the matchlock mechanism in
action, and, more generally, of the part small arms played in a sea
battle. Deck-mounted artillery begins the encounter: ‘Fuéronse
entrando poco a poco, y de industria los dejó llegar Ricaredo hasta
tenerlos a gusto de su artillería, la cual mandó disparar a tan buen
tiempo, que con cinco balas dio en la mitad de una de las galeras, con
tanta furia, que la abrió por medio toda’ [‘They drew closer little by
little, and with manoeuvring Ricaredo allowed them to approach until
he had them within range of his artillery, which he ordered to fire at
such a precise moment that five cannon balls hit the centre of one of
the galleys with so much force that it broke open in the middle.’]41
Ricaredo’s party follows with arcabucería—harquebus fire—and soon
overpowers the other ship. Once the Turkish combatants have perished,
Ricaredo forms a boarding party: ‘pasó con cincuenta arcabuceros a la
nave portuguesa, todos alerta y con las cuerdas encendidas’ [‘he passed
over to the Portuguese ship with fifty men armed with harquebuses, all
of them alert and with their matches lit’].42
Most of the references to the harquebus in Cervantes concern the
wound he received at Lepanto, which rendered his left hand unusable.
In the prologue to Don Quixote, Part II (1615), Cervantes remarks on
how ungenerous it was of Avellaneda, the author of the apocryphal
second volume of Don Quixote, to mock him for his honourable
disability: ‘Lo que no he podido dejar de sentir es que me note de viejo
y de manco, como si…mi manquedad hubiera nacido en alguna
taberna, sino en la más alta ocasión que vieron los siglos pasados.’43
[‘What I do mind, however, is that he accuses me of being old and one-
handed, as if…I had been wounded in some tavern and not at the
greatest event ever seen in past or present times.’]44 In Viaje del
Parnaso, the mythological Mercurio views the wound as a badge of
honour, calling Cervantes a ‘soldado / antiguo y valeroso / cual lo
muestra / la mano de que estás estropeado’ [‘an experienced and
valorous soldier, as your ruined hand shows’].45 The prologue to
Novelas ejemplares likewise cites the wound as a point of pride in a
verbal portrait of the author: ‘Perdió en la batalla naval de Lepanto la
mano izquierda de un arcabuzazo, herida que, aunque fea, él la tiene
por hermosa, por haberla cobrado en la más memorable y alta ocasión
que vieron los pasados siglos.’ [‘He lost his left hand in the battle of
Lepanto on account of a harquebus blast; he considers this ugly wound
beautiful because he earned it in the greatest and most memorable
encounter that has occurred during the past few centuries.’]46 The
representation of the wound taken at Lepanto reflects the ambivalence
with which Cervantes treats warfare more generally; it is at once
something honourable and something ugly. While military action can
bring about collective social good, the primary experience of warfare,
both for soldiers and for citizens, is loss.
The Soldier and the Knight Errant
The questions Cervantes asks of the institution of warfare at the turn of
the seventeenth century are the same as those he asks of the ancient
siege at Numancia: what is a just war, and how should individuals
behave when war is not just? In Don Quixote, Part I, the mad knight
gives a speech on the relative merits of the professions of arms [armas]
and letters [letras] to the assembled company of lovers, warriors, and
ordinary folk at Juan Palomeque’s inn. By the abstract terms armas and
letras, Don Quixote designates the work of the professional soldier in
the military campaigns of the Spanish Empire and that of the
university-educated civil servant or letrado. Both career paths require
sacrifices—effort, hunger, and poverty—but the risks are greater and
the rewards less certain for those who choose the soldier’s way. Don
Quixote explains that all those who participate in these two
touchstones of the emergent middle class in Golden Age Spain work,
directly or indirectly, for the cause of justice. The purpose of the
scholarly professional class is to ‘poner en su punto la justicia
distributiva y dar a cada uno lo que es suyo, entender y hacer que las
buenas leyes se guarden’ [‘maintain distributive justice, and give each
man what is his, and make certain that good laws are obeyed’].47 Brian
Brewer notes that the legal system of early modern Spain employed two
different definitions of justice: ‘distributive or geometric justice, which
dealt with the proportional distribution of goods among the members
of society, and commutative or arithmetic justice, which ensured the
exact equality of the items exchanged in any contract’.48 Distributive
justice, Don Quixote’s concern, adheres strictly to social hierarchy and
works to repair damage to the status quo; it does not hold all citizens to
be equal under the law.
The justice that military action can bring about, at least as it is
invoked in Don Quixote, is a more absolute or universal justice; to
paraphrase the mad knight, peace is the purpose of war.49 Warfare
establishes the institutions that bring order to the chaos of human life:
Las leyes no se pueden sustentar sin [las armas] porque con las armas se
defienden las repúblicas, se conservan los reinos, se guardan las
ciudades, se aseguran los caminos, se despejan los mares de cosarios, y,
finalmente, si por ellas no fuese, las repúblicas, los reinos, las
monarquías, las ciudades, los caminos de mar y tierra estarían sujetos al
rigor y a la confusión.
[Laws cannot be sustained without arms, because with arms nations are
defended, kingdoms maintained, cities defended, roads made secure,
seas cleared of pirates; in short, if not for arms, nations, kingdoms,
monarchies, cities, roads, and sea lanes would be subject to the
hardship and confusion that war brings.]50
Cervantes appears to support the military campaigns of the Spanish
Empire with this passage, representing them as necessary violence.
However, he combines this idealistic description with a portrait of the
individual soldier’s squalid existence:
[N]o hay ninguno más pobre en la misma pobreza, porque está
atendido a la miseria de su paga, que viene tarde o nunca, o a lo que
garbeare por sus manos, con notable peligro de su vida y de su
conciencia. Y a veces suele ser su desnudez tanta, que un coleto
acuchillado le sirve de gala y de camisa.
[[N]o one in his poverty is as poor as he, for he depends on his
miserable pay, which comes late or never, or on whatever he can steal
with his own hands at great risk to his life and conscience. Sometimes
he is so naked that a slashed and torn doublet is both uniform and
shirt.]51
Throughout Don Quixote’s depiction of the soldier’s life, idealism is at
odds with reality, just as in Don Quixote’s failed chivalric adventures.
Chivalry and the chivalric code influence the arms and letters speech in
several ways, and Don Quixote expresses a critique of early modern
warfare that resembles that of the epic poets. Cervantes, like other
early modern war writers, greets the technological shifts of the era and
the social phenomena they enable with ambivalence. The professional
soldiers of Don Quixote are poised at a transition point between the
concept of military exercise as the proper occupation of the nobility
and a new definition of the soldier as a paid worker motivated by a
practical need to earn a living. The opening of the novel describes Don
Quixote as a member of the lowest rank of a traditional noble class, ‘un
hidalgo de los de lanza en astillero, adarga antigua, rocín flaco y galgo
corredor’ [‘one of those who has a lance and ancient shield on a shelf
and keeps a skinny nag and a greyhound for racing’].52 The trappings
of warfare are part of the past of Don Quixote’s family; the armour he
finds so appropriate for his imagined profession as a knight-errant once
belonged to his great-grandparents and presumably was used in
traditional military campaigns in which the king called on the nobility
to serve the greater good.53 Warfare is what members of Don Quixote’s
social class were once supposed to do, but in the early modern context,
Don Quixote the hidalgo is a ridiculous soldier, a relic from a time past.
The early modern warrior practices an occupation that has not quite
caught up to his professional status; in turn, his notion of heroism has
not caught up to early modern technology. Both the arms and letters
speech and the captive’s tale speak to the difficulty of performing brave
and daring deeds in confusing, anonymous, large-scale battles. Don
Quixote describes boarding an enemy ship in a heroic manner:
Y si éste parece pequeño peligro, veamos si le iguala o hace ventajas el
de embestirse dos galeras por las proas en mitad del mar espacioso, las
cuales enclavijadas y trabadas, no le queda al soldado más espacio del
que concede dos pies de tabla del espolón; y con todo esto, viendo que
tiene delante de sí tantos ministros de la muerte que le amenazan
cuantos cañones de artillería se asestan de la parte contraria, que no
distan de su cuerpo una lanza, y viendo que al primer descuido de sus
pies irá a visitar los profundos senos de Neptuno, y, con todo esto, con
intrépido corazón, llevado de la honra que le incita, se pone a ser
blanco de tanta arcabucería, y procura pasar por tan estrecho paso al
bajel contrario.
[And if this seems an insignificant danger, let us see if it is equalled or
surpassed when the prows of two galleys collide in the middle of the
wide sea, for when they lock and grapple, the soldier is left with no
more than two feet of plank on the ram of the ship; despite this, seeing
that he has in front of him as many ministers of death threatening him
as there are artillery cannons aimed at him from the other side, only a
lance’s throw away, and seeing that at the first misstep he will visit the
deep bosom of Neptune, despite this, with an intrepid heart, carried by
the honour that urges him on, he makes himself the target of all their
volleys and attempts to cross that narrow passage to the enemy
vessel.]54
The individual soldier would have to demonstrate esfuerzo in order to
undertake such a task, but unlike a chivalric knight, he does not face a
fair fight. The early modern soldier’s enemies are not even personified
in this passage; his enemies are technology and nature, the cannon and
the sea. It is no coincidence that it is Don Quixote, the would-be knight,
who calls the artillery and the harquebus ‘endemionados instrumentos’
[‘diabolical instruments’]; they make the individual heroism he longs
for almost impossible in real military encounters.55
Civilian Consequences
As with Alonso de Ercilla, who disapproved in La Araucana of ‘killing in
cold blood’, there is a curious pacifism to Cervantes’s lightly
fictionalized accounts of the soldier’s profession.56 Cervantes undercuts
his characters’ praise for military glory by weaving together stories of
war and love. In Cervantes’s novellas, personal and national narratives
blend, and the texts emphasize the consequences of early modern
warfare for civilian and family life. Military campaigns lead to crime
and the commodification of human life, for civilians as well as soldiers.
The interpolated tale El curioso impertinente from Don Quixote, Part I is a
story about disasters in love, but it contains many references to war.
War appears first as a metaphor for seduction. Curious husband
Anselmo asks Lotario to make an assault on Camila’s chastity, wishing
to see ‘si ella sale, como creo que saldrá, con la palma desta batalla’ [‘if
she emerges, as I believe she will, triumphant from this battle’].57
Lotario, protesting the experiment, argues that the equivalence
Anselmo imagines between love and war is false; while war leads to
‘honra, gloria, y provecho’ [‘honour, glory, and advantage’], testing a
fragile woman can only result in shame.58 Lotario is unfortunately
correct. After his affair with Camila is discovered, Lotario flees into the
soldier’s life and dies in the 1503 battle of Cerignola. Lotario, whom
the narrator describes as ‘el tarde arrepentido’ [‘repentant too late’],
appears to interpret service in war as a form of penance.59
Interestingly, in this particular battle, Spanish artillery played a
decisive role.60
The story of the captive Ruy Pérez de Viedma, which directly
follows the arms and letters speech in Don Quixote, likewise reworks
contemporary military history. The captive was present both at Lepanto
and La Goleta, and in his personality he brings together the ideals of
chivalry and the profession of the modern soldier. Viedma is a model of
reason, virtue, and compassion, and the reversals of fortune that
comprise his story result in a happy conclusion. At the end of his tale
he has found a wife, found and lost a fortune, and found his lost family,
who have become wealthy enough to support him. The captive
experiences both the glory and the suffering of war to an extraordinary
degree. At the outset of a twenty-two-year military career, he embarks
at Alicante for Genoa, travels to Milan and Flanders, and becomes part
of Don Juan de Austria’s force at Lepanto. During the tumult of battle,
he is taken captive: ‘aquél día, que fue para la cristianidad tan
dichoso…yo sólo fui el desdichado’ [‘And that day, which was so
fortunate for Christendom…I alone was unfortunate’].61
After Lepanto, Viedma is plunged into a world of slaves and
renegades, a warfare-enabled system of human trafficking in which, as
Cervantes states in El amante liberal, ‘todo se vende y todo se compra’
[‘everything is for sale and everything can be bought’].62 The captive’s
tale shares its detailed description of the bargaining over slaves and
ransoms with El amante liberal and La española inglesa; every human life
has a different price, and that price fluctuates according to market
forces. Money enables the captive’s escape. Zoraida, a beautiful Muslim
woman who wants to convert to Christianity, offers Viedma gold for his
ransom along with her hand in marriage. The Christian captives in the
baño, the Algerian prison, buy a ship with the help of a renegade, and
the captive steals Zoraida and her father from her house. The father’s ill
fate—to lose his fortune, his daughter, and potentially his life, as
Zoraida is forced to abandon him on a deserted isle—indexes the
human cost of war and the traffic in human flesh it has enabled. The
money that was so important in bringing Zoraida and Viedma together
is likewise lost, to French pirates, who seize upon their fellow
Christians as a target of opportunity.
While a slave for renegade masters, Viedma rowed in Turkish
galleys, providing labour in the dark underbelly of the maritime war
machine. The role of the oarsman was even more marginal than that of
the soldier in early modern Mediterranean maritime campaigns; most
were slaves, convicts, or prisoners of war.63 The heroic Viedma is not
the only galeote in Don Quixote. On the road to Andalucía, Don Quixote
meets a group of petty criminals on their way to row in the king’s
galleys. Among them is the famous pícaro Ginés de Pasamonte. His ten-
year sentence is equivalent to a civil death; legally, he no longer exists.
Moreover, this is not the heavily chained convict’s first indentured
service as an oarsman: ‘Para servir a Dios y al rey, otra vez he estado
cuatro años’ [‘to serve God and the king, I’ve already spent four years
on the galleys’].64 Here, as with other depictions of warfare, justice is
the key issue. Don Quixote decides that the correct response to the
prisoners is to free them because they are being sent to the king’s
galleys by force; though they soon turn on him, it does not necessarily
follow that Quixote was incorrect.65 Anthony Close traces the literary
history of the galeotes episode, citing Miguel de Unamuno and Herman
Melville among others who have interpreted Don Quixote’s actions as
an apotheosis of humane behaviour. Close notes, however, that the
episode can also be read as a ‘right-wing fable about the folly of doing
good to the undeserving’.66 Close argues that Don Quixote enacts
‘justice of a humane, informal, commonsensical kind, which cuts
through legalities and tempers harshness with mercy’; it must be said,
however, that the question of what justice means remains in doubt for
this particular episode.67 Perhaps it is just to order Ginés de Pasamonte
to expiate his sins by putting his life at risk, or perhaps rowing in the
galleys is a cruel and unusual punishment, tantamount to a death
sentence for petty crime.
Exemplary Warfare
In Don Quixote and in Cervantes’s other literary works, acts of war are
never simple or unambiguous in their meaning, not even in stories that
end happily. Ruth El Saffar classifies the war tales among Cervantes’s
exemplary novels, El amante liberal and La española inglesa, as
‘idealistic’.68 Both novellas end in the triumph of true love and true
religion, but like Don Quixote, they depict the Mediterranean cycle of
war, imprisonment, and ransom. Of key importance to these stories are
the ancillary social phenomena that develop in societies that engage in
warfare with each other but whose citizens also interact on a personal
level, whether through trade, friendship, or marriage. Multiple parties
are involved in the conflict: the Protestant English, the Catholic
Spaniards and Portuguese, the Ottoman Turks, and in the middle, the
renegades of the Mediterranean and the secret Catholics of England,
who attempt to exist between worlds but properly belong nowhere.69
In these two novellas, the power of money is stronger than the
power of love or the power of blood, and every act of war results from
financial motives. As with Don Quixote, historical military encounters
provide inspiration. Caroll B. Johnson discusses the sack of Cádiz in
1596 as a source for La española inglesa; the plot turns around a captive
Spanish girl whose trade value fluctuates with her beauty.70 El amante
liberal, which begins in Cyprus, ‘follows corsairs, renegades, and
captives along the contact zone between Christianity and Islam…
mapping 
the 
Mediterranean 
in 
between’.71 
The 
two 
captive
protagonists, Ricardo and Leonisa, come from Trapani, a city in Sicily
known for its Ottoman sympathies, its salt industry, and its slave
trade.72 Cyprus, where the captives go to market, was itself long part of
a contested zone; it passed into Muslim control in 1570, and many of
its Christian inhabitants converted to Islam, as is dramatized with the
character of Halima in El amante liberal.73
At the beginning of the story, Ricardo and Leonisa, both civilians,
are caught between Muslim corsairs and Christian knights of Malta. In
the tumult, they become slaves in Muslim hands. The depiction of
piracy in El amante liberal reflects a historical context in which
‘virtually the entire Mediterranean was an arena of conflict among
warring civilizations, with piracy as one of the principal means by
which it was carried out’.74 Piracy affects civilians as well as soldiers,
and as such, it is logical that it is the primary form of warfare in the
exemplary novels, which feature women and other civilians
prominently among their casts of characters.
The acts of war in La española inglesa are just as implicated with the
trade in goods and people as those of El amante liberal, and they inhabit
a grey area between national military activity and piracy. Cervantes
explores the social consequences of the trade in human beings in La
española inglesa; María Antonia Garcés characterizes the tale as an
‘intense probing of the subject of captivity, where one captivity remits
to another’.75 In La española inglesa, Clotaldo, the father of male
protagonist Ricaredo, is an English soldier of high status. He takes
seven-year old Isabela captive in defiance of orders from his
commanding officer; for Clotaldo the soldier, war is about spoils, not
service to the monarch. Once Isabela is grown, she becomes a marker
in a courtly status game: Clotaldo and his wife present her to Queen
Elizabeth, and the queen, in a sense, ransoms her back to them.
Elizabeth makes the captive girl part of her retinue and requires
Clotaldo’s son Ricaredo, who wishes to marry Isabela, to win her back
through military exploits. Ricaredo’s career as a soldier is less
honourable than Ruy Pérez de Viedma’s: he becomes a state-sanctioned
corsario or privateer, and his only famous exploit involves the retaking
of a Portuguese ship from Turkish corsairs. He keeps the Iberian goods,
which in their turn originated from the Indies, kills the Turks and
renegades, and allows the Catholics to return to their homes. Ricaredo
frees the Iberians on account of his status as a secret Catholic; others
alternately interpret his decision as magnanimity and weakness.
Ricaredo’s dubious status as both a soldier for the English crown and
the captain of an actively raiding pirate vessel reflects the ideological
conflict over the nature of piracy in the early modern Mediterranean.
As Murrin explains, from the Iberian perspective, the fact that Ricaredo
is an agent of his monarch does not exempt him from being a pirate:
‘both the Spaniards and the Portuguese claimed monopolies on trade in
their zones, monopolies that other powers never recognized. As a
result, the Iberians considered anyone who violated their monopoly a
pirate’.76 Garcés calls piracy in this context ‘tacit warfare’.77
Cervantes exploits the slippage between soldier and pirate in this
story, introducing an ideological ambiguity that has the potential to
destabilize nationalistic discourses. Ricaredo is English, but he is also
Catholic, and thus he has an important moral base in common with the
Iberians to whom he shows mercy. Ricaredo eventually immigrates to
Spain; the conclusion of the story finds him in Sevilla, claiming his
bride Isabela just as she is about to take holy vows. Though it is
possible to see the marriages that conclude La española inglesa and El
amante liberal as a triumph of exemplary characters over the forces that
separate them, it is also possible to read the finales of these novellas as
a ‘capitulation to the dominant forces of society’, which El Saffar
defines as marriage and nobility.78
When one considers El amante liberal and La española inglesa not just
as stories of love but also as stories of war, the happy endings seem less
promising, at least at the societal level. The problems of these stories
are collective, but the solutions are individual. The suffering in El
amante liberal and La española inglesa does not result from the
characters’ personalities, families, morality, individual religious faith,
or any other private concern. The four protagonists, Ricardo, Ricaredo,
Leonisa, and Isabela, are each so exemplary that they are almost
characterless; they are near-interchangeable types of virtue. El Saffar
notes that scholars have traditionally criticized these novellas for their
lack of individual psychology, but I would argue that the generic nature
of these stories’ protagonists serves a distinct purpose within
Cervantes’s fiction.79 As everymen and women, these virtuous types
represent the collective suffering warfare brings to civilians and
soldiers. All the forces that separate the protagonists are common
concerns in the Mediterranean: sea battles, raids on cities, slave
markets, shipwrecks, ransoms, intercultural contact, and cultural
misunderstandings. Most of these phenomena are the consequences of
warfare. Recompense for suffering in war only occurs at the level of the
individual and the family, not the nation or region. Ricaredo and
Isabela’s union does not necessarily depict peace between England and
Spain, and it does not even imagine peace between Protestants and
Catholics. Leonisa and Ricardo, for their part, might begin the cycle of
captivity again at any time, if pirates should return to Trapani. The
miracle of these stories is not that good things eventually happen to
good people, but that warfare has any positive consequences at all.
Even though certain exemplary novels have an undeniable
redemptive current, the fact remains that warfare in the Mediterranean
irrevocably changes the characters’ lives, and not always for the good.
All four characters are marked by their captivity. Isabela’s relationship
with her parents is forever estranged; at the end of the story, her letters
to Clotaldo and his wife shows that she considers her captors her true
parents.80 Leonisa appears to assert her own will at the end of her
story, but in fact Ricaredo’s ostentatious public generosity to her may
constrain her choices.81 Ricaredo and Ricardo experience more material
losses, and it is difficult to discern what their social status might be at
the end of their tales. What is most disconcerting about these stories is
that so many others—less virtuous, perhaps, or simply less lucky—must
have experienced war and captivity without redemption.
Conclusion
Cervantes’s war writing spans his entire literary career. His works
ponder both the ravages of war in the abstract, as in La Numancia,
whose historical and symbolic overtones invite allegorical readings, and
in the concrete, as in the tale of the captive Ruy Pérez de Viedma in
Don Quixote, Part I, whose biography coincides so closely with
Cervantes’s own. In each of these works, Cervantes approaches the
question of war with characteristic ambivalence. His concern for justice
is evident throughout his depictions of armed conflict, but the texts
never declare with certainty what justice means or whether it can be
achieved in times of war. Present also are the horrors of war, whether
overt, as in the scenes of starvation in La Numancia, or subtle, as in the
hints at lost opportunity in the exemplary novels. The chivalric values
Don Quixote holds dear—the defence of the weak and the fight against
unfairness of all kinds—might seem to be a potential corrective for
anonymous, gunpowder-enabled warfare, but they are ultimately a
false hope, an idealistic fantasy better suited to the past than the future.
The hope for redemption, if it can be found anywhere in a
Mediterranean embroiled in war, exists in individual faith, virtue, and
luck, not in values or actions that can be expressed at the societal level.
Works Cited
Baras Escolá, Alfredo. ‘Estudio preliminar’. In Tragedia de Numancia by Miguel
de Cervantes Saavedra, edited by Baras Escolá (Zaragoza: Prensas
Universitarias de Zaragoza, 2009), pp. 13–54.
Bergmann, Emilie. ‘The Epic Vision of Cervantes’s “Numancia”’. Theatre Journal
36 (1984): pp. 85–96.
Braudel, Fernand. The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of
Philip II, translated by Siân Reynolds, 2 vols. (New York: Harper & Row,
1972).
Brewer, Brian. ‘From Conquest to Contract: Property, Justice, and the New
Economic Empire in Don Quijote, Part One’. Revista de Estudios Hispánicos 48
(2014): pp. 3–24.
Canavaggio, Jean, Cervantes, translated by Mauro Armiño, 2nd ed. (Barcelona:
Espasa-Calpe, 1997).
Cascardi, Anthony J. Cervantes, Literature, and the Discourse of Politics (Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 2012).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Don Quixote, translated by Edith Grossman
(New York: Harper Collins, 2003).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. El ingenioso hidalgo don Quijote de la Mancha,
edited by L. A. Murillo, 2 vols. (Madrid: Castalia, 1978).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. La Galatea, edited by Francisco López Estrada
and María López García-Berdoy (Madrid: Cátedra, 1999).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Novelas ejemplares, edited by Harry Sieber, 2
vols. (Madrid: Cátedra, 2009).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Tragedia de Numancia, edited by Alfredo Baras
Escolá (Zaragoza: Prensas Universitarias de Zaragoza, 2009).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Viaje del Parnaso, edited by Miguel Herrero
García, revised by Abraham Madroñal (Madrid: Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas, 2016).
Close, Anthony. ‘The Liberation of the Galley Slaves and the Ethos of Don
Quijote Part I’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 27, no. 1
(2007): pp. 7–30.
Dandelet, Thomas James. The Renaissance of Empire in Early Modern Europe
(New York: Cambridge UP, 2014).
De Armas, Frederick. ‘The Necromancy of Imitation: Lucan and Cervantes’s La
Numancia’. In El Arte Nuevo de Estudiar Comedias: Literary Theory and Golden
Age Spanish Drama, edited by Barbara A. Simerka (Lewisburg: Bucknell UP,
1996), pp. 246–58.
Fuchs, Barbara. Passing for Spain: Cervantes and the Fictions of Identity (Urbana:
University of Illinois Press, 2003).
Garcés, María Antonia. Cervantes in Algiers: A Captive’s Tale (Nashville:
Vanderbilt University Press, 2002).
Hale, J.R. War and Society in Renaissance Europe 1450–1620 (New York: St.
Martin’s Press, 1985).
Hall, Bert S. Weapons and Warfare in Renaissance Europe: Gunpowder, Technology,
and Tactics (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 1997).
Johnson, Carroll B. Cervantes and the Material World (Urbana-Champaign:
University of Illinois Press, 2000).
Kahn, Aaron M. The Ambivalence of Imperial Discourse: Cervantes’s La Numancia
within the ‘Lost Generation’ of Spanish Drama (1570–90) (Oxford: Peter Lang,
2008).
Keen, Maurice. Chivalry (New Haven: Yale UP, 1984).
Lomax, Derek. The Reconquest of Spain (London: Longman, 1978).
Murrin, Michael. History and Warfare in Renaissance Epic (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1994).
Quint, David. Epic and Empire: Politics and Generic Form from Virgil to Milton
(Princeton: Princeton UP, 1992).
Rodríguez de Montalvo, Garci. Amadís de Gaula, edited by Juan Manuel Cacho
Blecua, 2 vols. (Madrid: Cátedra, 1987).
Rupp, Stephen. Heroic Forms: Cervantes and the Literature of War (Toronto: U of
Toronto P, 2014).
Saffar, Ruth S. El. Beyond Fiction: The Recovery of the Feminine in the Novels of
Cervantes (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984).
Silva, Feliciano de. Florisel de Niquea: Cuarta parte, libros I y II (Zaragoza: Pierres
de la Floresta, 1568).
Simerka, Barbara A. ‘“That the Rulers Should Sleep without Bad Dreams”: Anti-
Epic Discourse in La Numancia and Arauco Domado’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the
Cervantes Society of America 18, no.1 (1998): pp. 46–70.
Triplette, Stacey. ‘The Giants of Modernity from Amadís to Don Quijote’. Bulletin
of Spanish Studies XCI (2014): pp. 819–45.
Turnbull, Stephen. The Art of Renaissance Warfare (London: Greenhill Books,
2006).
Williamson, Edwin. The Half-Way House of Fiction: Don Quixote and Arthurian
Romance (New York: Oxford University Press, 1984).
1 Baras Escolá, ‘Estudio Preliminar’, p. 15.
2 Kahn, p. 179. For the identification of the Spain of Philip II with the
Roman Empire; see also Dandelet, pp. 138–60.
3 Kahn, p. 29.
4 Cervantes, Tragedia de Numancia, ll. 537, 541–4. All translations from
primary sources are my own unless otherwise noted.
5 Quint, pp. 9–11; De Armas, pp. 246–58.
6 Quint, p. 9.
7 Murrin, p. 79.
8 Murrin, p. 82.
9 Lomax, p. 54.
10 Keen, p. 16.
11 Keen, p. 3.
12 Iberian chivalric writer Feliciano de Silva makes the anti-fraud argument
very clear; his anti-knight, an inveterate horse-stealer and trickster, is named
Fraudador. See Silva.
13 See Amadís de Gaula’s ritual duel with Abies of Ireland for single combat
that proceeds in the proper order under equal conditions: Rodríguez de
Montalvo, Amadís, vol I, pp. 316–23. For the rules of chivalric combat as they
are expressed in Don Quixote, see Triplette.
14 Williamson, p. 44.
15 Cervantes, Tragedia de Numancia, ll. 267–79.
16 Cervantes, Tragedia de Numancia, l. 101.
17 Cervantes, Tragedia de Numancia, ll. 393, 537.
18 Bergmann, p. 87.
19 Cervantes, Tragedia de Numancia, l. 2075.
20 Cervantes, Tragedia de Numancia, l. 2445.
21 Simerka, p. 63.
22 Hall, p. 41.
23 Hall, pp. 10–13.
24 See Hall, pp. 67–104 for the adaptation of gunpowder and gunpowder
weapons to the European context in the fifteenth century.
25 Hale, pp. 47–8; Hall, pp. 216–19.
26 Rupp, p. 10.
27 Rupp, p. 12.
28 Rupp, pp. 13–14.
29 Murrin, p. 123.
30 Canavaggio, p. 69. See also Rupp, p. 9.
31 Canavaggio, p. 71.
32 Braudel, vol. 2, p. 1088.
33 Canavaggio, p. 73.
34 Canavaggio, pp. 73–7.
35 Canavaggio, p. 100.
36 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 496, n. 7; p. 486; Cervantes, Novelas
ejemplares, vol. I, p. 254; Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 493.
37 Braudel, vol. 2, p. 1102.
38 Turnbull, p. 101.
39 Murrin, pp. 179–80.
40 Hall, p. 96.
41 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, vol. I, p. 253.
42 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, vol. I, p. 256.
43 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. II, p. 33.
44 Cervantes, Don Quixote, p. 455.
45 Cervantes, Viaje del Parnaso, I.211–13.
46 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, vol. I, p. 51.
47 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 466; p. 329.
48 Brewer, p. 11.
49 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 466.
50 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 469; pp. 331–2.
51 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 468; p. 331.
52 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 69; p. 19.
53 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 75.
54 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 470; p. 332.
55 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 471; p. 333.
56 Murrin, p. 212.
57 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 403; p. 275.
58 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 406; p. 378.
59 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 446; p. 312.
60 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 446, n. 23; Hall, p. 167.
61 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 477; p. 377.
62 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, vol. I, p. 141.
63 Murrin, p. 180.
64 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, pp. 271–2; p. 179.
65 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 465.
66 Close, p. 23.
67 Close, p. 25.
68 Saffar, pp. xii–xv.
69 For a description of renegades in Algiers, see Garcés, pp. 34–7.
70 Johnson, pp. 154–60.
71 Fuchs, p. 63.
72 Johnson, pp. 129–30.
73 Johnson, pp. 118–19.
74 Cascardi, p. 191.
75 Garcés, p. 243.
76 Murrin, p. 154.
77 Garcés, p. 29.
78 Saffar, p. 18.
79 Saffar, p. 139.
80 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, vol. I, p. 274.
81 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, vol. I, p. 187.
Chapter 3
Cervantes and Empire
Frederick A. de Armas
University of Chicago
Born in 1547, at a time when Charles V was leader of the western
world and ruled the largest empire ever known, Miguel de Cervantes
would reflect on his imperial habitat and experiences throughout his
works. Cervantes exhibits his pride at fighting for the Spanish Empire
and foregrounds his role at the famous battle of Lepanto, a naval battle
that saw western powers put a stop to Ottoman expansion in the
Mediterranean, the second great empire of the period, with which they
competed for control of the Mediterranean. At the same time, his works
often problematize questions of empire, from specific tactics in war, to
the morality of waging war against other Christian nations, to general
questions of imperial expansionism. This essay will look at Cervantes’s
relations to empire in a chronological manner. Although some have
sought to discover a more critical attitude starting somewhere between
1588 and 1596, this essay will point to a continuing wavering and
ambiguity in his relations to empire, starting from his first substantial
works in the early 1580s until his demise in 1616.
As Thomas J. Dandelet remarks, Charles V had ‘the largest collection
of kingdoms and territories that any European monarch had ruled since
the time of Charlemagne’ to which he added over time ‘the Duchy of
Milan (1535), the former Aztec Empire in Mexico (1520), and the
former Inca Empire in Peru (1534)’.1 Even before this happened, and as
a way of announcing that he was breaking the bounds of past empires,
Charles turned to mythology to express his desire for imperial
expansion. Hercules, it was said, fashioned two rocks at the western
end of the Mediterranean (called the Pillars of Hercules) as a warning
(Non plus ultra) that no one should go beyond, that they should not
enter the waters of Oceanus, filled with monsters and other perils.
Charles responded with a new motto. A banderole would beckon the
traveller or adventurer: Plus ultra or Plus oultre, go beyond.2 It would be
America—the land beyond—that would provide him with the gold for
his wars of conquest.
As a child, Miguel de Cervantes would have been subjected to the
artistic and literary representations of Charles as a ruler who revived
and surpassed the greatest conquerors of the Roman Empire, albeit in a
Christianized form. Indeed, the emperor paid very close attention to
representations of himself, choosing Titian as his preferred painter and
Leone Leoni for sculpture.3 Antonio de Guevara would make him a new
Marcus Aurelius; while others would see in his conquests a new Julius
Caesar. His many Triumphs after decisive battles were classicized
processions that closely imitated Roman entries.4 As he grew up,
Cervantes would then be subjected to similar praises heaped on
Charles’s successor, Philip II. Like his father, Philip cultivated the
image of the emperor as successor to the ancient Romans. A new
generation of writers from Pedro Mexía to Juan de Herrera and José
Siguenza would praise Philip as a new Augustus and a new
Constantine,5 but he would also be depicted as a native Spaniard, as a
new Cid or a new Bernardo del Carpio, as well as a descendant of the
legendary Spanish kings: ‘Tubal, Hispalo, and Hercules’.6
But Cervantes was not just subjected to the visions of empire as they
were presented in his homeland. His travels to Italy, his experiences in
wars against the Ottoman Empire, and then his five-year captivity in
Algiers opened new perspectives for him. These three events reappear
throughout his works. He spent much of his life ‘desiring Italy’, a desire
often represented in his literary texts through allusion to the art,
architecture, and culture of the Italian peninsula.7 Throughout his
literary works, Cervantes reminds his reader over and over again that
he was a hero at Lepanto. However, some intuit even here Cervantes’s
well-known ambiguity and irony. Anthony J. Cascardi affirms:
Cervantes’s stated literary aim was to defeat the heroic romances, and
yet he refers to the battle of Lepanto in the prologue to the Exemplary
Novels (1613) with great pride—excessive pride, perhaps; his language
bordering in hyperbole…The event seems mixed in Cervantes’s memory
with the same combination of admiration and irony that he associates
with the romances of chivalry themselves.8
At twenty-eight, he was taken to Algiers where he would remain
captive for almost five years. There is no question, as María Antonia
Garcés states, that the trauma of captivity led him to rewrite many
episodes in later life, and yet being unable to ‘represent the truth of
trauma’ and thus inventing new plots and creating elaborate allegories
and metaphors.9
In spite of all the hardships, there is much that Cervantes would
learn from his years in captivity, not the least, how the enemies of his
empire lived. Algiers, according to Matthew Carr, ‘had become
something of a boomtown whose cosmopolitan population included
Jews, Moriscos, Christian converts to Islam, and foreign adventurers
from throughout Europe and even from the Americas’.10 There,
Cervantes would have witnessed how renegades were able to quickly
climb in society, as opposed to Spain’s closed society, which anxiously
concealed any non-Christian ancestors. There, he would have seen how
the language of trade held sway (along with lawless piracy). There, he
would meet peoples from throughout the Mediterranean and even
make friends with Italian writers.
Upon his return to Spain, Cervantes discovered that the glories of his
military service were way in the past and that King Philip II was too
busy annexing Portugal to care about yet one more petition. After a
brief embassy to Oran, Cervantes had to find ways to make a living. But
this did not prevent him from starting a literary career. Two of his
earliest works are plays in which questions of empire are central: El
trato de Argel and La Numancia. The love intrigue of the first, as
Canavaggio asserts, ‘is out of tune with the realistic episodes—
involving the selling of slaves, apostatizing, ransom, cruelty, torture’.11
This comedia thus combines personal experience of captivity with
novelistic elements, creating a kind of fragmented work that reflects
the decentring of the author as he writes from the space of the Other.12
The novelistic elements also provide a ‘happy ending’ to an ‘otherwise
ghastly tale’.13 There is a second happy ending that never comes to
pass: the yearning for a Spanish fleet to come and take over Algiers.
When some Moorish boys make fun of two Christian slaves telling them
that Don Juan de Austria will never come to rescue them, one of the
Christian slaves answers that Philip II himself will come as soon as he
deals with the ‘Lutherans’ in Flanders. Cervantes’s plea, heard through
the voice of the captive, is never taken up by Philip II who seems to
neglect the Mediterranean in favour of the Atlantic.14 In spite of the
play’s crusading spirit and its propagandistic and testimonial nature,15
there are cracks in the heroics of war. Aurelio critiques conquests, since
the Spanish soldiers show themselves: ‘codiciosos / más del rubio metal
que de otra cosa’16 [covetous / of the golden metal above all].17
According to Stephen Rupp, Cervantes is already pointing to the
decadence of the heroic: ‘In bemoaning war’s decline into mercantile
exchange, Aurelio looks back to a remote Golden Age and also to a
more recent period of heroic warfare.’18 Is this also the greed unleashed
by the gold coming from the Indies? Does Cervantes fault Philip II for
diverting his attention to a more lucrative enterprise?
La Numancia, considered the best early modern Spanish tragedy, is
an equally ambiguous and conflictive play in terms of empire. Here,
Cervantes creates a myth of origins for the Spanish Empire; the valiant
defence but eventual fall of the city of Numancia to the Romans can be
equated to the epic fall of Troy to the Greeks.19 Both the Numantians
and the Trojans go on to establish new empires: Spain and Rome.
Cervantes portrays the two classic epic virtues, foregrounding one in
each of the forces; the city’s inhabitants exemplify fortitudo while
Cipión and his army practice sapientia.20 In spite of their valour, the
Numantians will be overwhelmed by superior forces and a siege that
strangles the city. The personification of the river Duero prophesies the
fall of Numancia, but foresees a glorious future for Spain. Juan Bautista
Avalle-Arce has claimed that this speech is concerned with the question
of imperial renovatio. The ancient empire will be transformed into the
Spanish Empire, which will gain its revenge through the sack of Rome
in 1527 under Charles V.21 The prophecy goes on to tell of the future
union of Spain and Portugal under Philip II.
The foretelling, however, can be interpreted in different ways. After
all, the Duero is actually telling what Proteus had prophesied, and
Proteus is a very slippery figure. The many erased and distorted
elements regarding the history of Spain (such as the absence of the
Moorish invasion of Spain), question the truth of prophecy.22 Aaron M.
Kahn, who has studied the play from the point of view of moral
opposition to Philip II in pre-Lopean drama, points to events that some
may have considered tyrannical: ‘In 1580, with the Portuguese throne
vacant, he threatened to invade Portugal if he were not crowned their
king, which sparked controversy in Catholic Europe…for considering
waging war on a fellow Catholic country in a time when unity among
Catholics was necessary to fend off heretics and infidels.’23 In the
prophecy by the river Duero we read: ‘el jirón lusitano tan famoso, /
que un tiempo se cortó de los vestidos / de la ilustre Castilla, ha de
zurcirse / de nuevo’24 [‘the famed Lusitanian banner / that at one point
was cut off from the dress / of illustrious Castile, should be sown back
/ anew’]. Indeed: ‘The image of Castile’s torn dress which is now
mended debases the endeavour and brings into question its heroic
nature.’25
While borrowing from anti-Philip sentiment found in early plays, La
Numancia also follows the structure of Aeschylus’s The Persians where
the defeated are the tragic heroes. Some critics believe that the Roman
general Scipio is the tragic hero who intones a lament when he realizes
that all the inhabitants of the city have killed themselves and destroyed
their possessions so that the Romans would not be able to have a
triumphal parade with the spoils of war.26 Such triumphs were very
much in fashion during the times of Charles V and Philip II. In
emulating the Roman Empire, was Spain also going to be lamenting its
fall? In looking at the siege of Numancia through the siege of Troy, in
writing a foundation myth of the Spanish Empire through the Virgilian
foundation myth of Rome, Cervantes is not only echoing the ancients so
as to praise a bellicose and imperialistic agenda but he is also pointing
to the foibles of his predecessors, and thus to the pitfalls of
contemporary imperialism.
Cervantes’s theatre was soon forgotten by an audience that became
enthralled with Lope de Vega, who introduced major changes in the art
of writing plays. Although Cervantes would publish eight plays never
performed towards the end of his life, he slowly veers away from
theatre. His first major work of prose fiction is La Galatea (1585), a
pastoral romance that features the amorous feelings of Elicio and
Erastro (best friends) for Galatea. A number of other love stories cluster
around the main plot. For our purposes, what is most important here is
the Prologue. Cervantes argues that he can still write eclogues since he
is still young: ‘apenas salido de los límites de la juventud, da licencia a
semejantes ocupaciones’ [‘hardly passing the limits of youth, gives
license for such occupations’].27 Cervantes is thus announcing that his
literary career will follow that of Virgil, beginning with eclogues, which
should be written by the young. Such a career ends in epic, the sign of
the mature poet.28 This announcement of a literary career has at least
two consequences; the first is that he commits himself to writing later
in life a work related to epic, and the second that he accepts the
political aspects of his own work. As David Quint has explained: ‘The
Aeneid had, in fact, decisively transformed epic for posterity…[into] a
genre that was overtly political.’29 Cervantes will include experiments
that take up epic elements as early as La Numancia. He continues with
an apprenticeship to epic in Don Quixote, and seeks to culminate his
career with an epic in prose, Persiles y Sigismunda. Cervantes’s
preoccupation with the Spanish Empire thus makes epic (now written
in prose) an ideal genre for him. His imperial concerns will find an
echo in Virgil, whose hero, Aeneas, was claimed as ancestor for Charles
V and Philip II.30
Two poems by Cervantes underline his positive attitude towards
some of the wars of empire. The first one, written previous to the
sailing of the Spanish Armada against England, ‘Canción primera a la
Armada Invencible’ [‘First Poem on the Invincible Armada’], is
undoubtedly a poem in praise of the enterprise. For Cervantes, this is a
just war that responds to English aggression, and Philip II is a new King
David.31 With the defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588, the empire
suffered such a total and unexpected loss that voices came together to
praise their land at a time of catastrophe. In this poem, Cervantes uses
the excuse of the storm that destroyed the fleet. At the same time he
praises Philip as a new Moses and as the hand of justice that will
destroy the Lutherans.32 Thus, in expected triumph and in surprising
loss, Cervantes backs his empire’s expedition to England.
For Adrienne Martin, ‘A la entrada del Duque de Medina en Cádiz’
[‘On the Entry of the Duke of Medina in Cadiz’] ‘is the most
accomplished among a group of sonnets that satirize one of the darker
moments in the history of Philip II’s twilight reign’.33 The English
sacked the city with impunity, taking everything of value. They
remained in the city for two weeks. Knowing what was happening, the
Duke stayed away so as not to confront the enemy, and only came to
Cadiz after they had withdrawn. Johnson calls the Duke ‘a pompous
and blundering coward’.34 Cervantes certainly agrees in this brilliant
burlesque sonnet. Of course, the butt of the satire is not the empire, but
one of its military leaders who has failed to defend the Spanish lands.
The poem also lashes out against soldiers who were not trained, armed,
or prepared to fight. Exhibiting their plumes, these soldiers manifest
‘their ridiculous ostentation and their impotence’.35
Jesús Botello asserts that the year 1598 represents a change in
Cervantes’s attitude toward the empire. Although I would emphasize a
certain ambiguity from the very beginning of his writings, it is true that
his criticisms become stronger and much more obvious at this point.36
Indeed, the most damning view of empire, and particularly of Philip II,
is found in the sonnet that Botello singles out: ‘Al túmulo de Felipe II
en Sevilla’. Written soon after the death of the monarch, it has as
background a petty battle between the Inquisition and the Town’s
Council at the Cathedral.37 The catafalque was immense, consisting of
three levels with a fifteen-foot image of St Lawrence and a sixteen-foot
obelisk on top, which exhibited an image of the phoenix on a bed of
flames, symbolizing rebirth.38 Myriad images covered this ephemeral
architecture.39 Since the catafalque remained at the Cathedral for a
long time, many poets came to recite their verses, including Cervantes.
In Cervantes’s sonnet, a soldier expresses his stupefaction at the
construction, using profanities and vulgar language. The sonnet’s
tremendous success and the fact that the lines ‘fuese y no hubo nada’
[‘he left and there was nothing’]40 have become proverbial, show ‘the
immense lie that the tomb represented, the false sympathies that it
inspired and the hypocrisy of the society that created it’.41 And ‘in the
only allusion to the king, Cervantes insinuates that his soul, in an
absurd act of arrogance, will abandon heaven to enjoy the flattery of
his sumptuous, temporary, and fake tomb on earth’.42
We can view both the burlesque elements in Cervantes’s poetry and
the epic tone of some of his theatre as preludes to his masterpiece, Don
Quixote (1605). To this mix we must add the romances of chivalry,
immense and monstrous works that praised a bygone age of heroism
but with roots in the epic. These romances, together with ancient epics,
were used by monarchs such as Charles V and Philip II to inspire
imperial expansionism. Lavish entertainments were put on in imitation
of the romances, and the rulers claimed ancestry from ancient epic
heroes, particularly Aeneas. We know, for example that Charles was
most taken with the Belianís de Grecia [Belianis of Greece] (1545). His
son Philip was able to see parts of the Amadis (1508) performed at the
palace of Binche in the late 1540s, as he was presented to the court of
Mary of Hungary, sister of Charles V.43 Since Cervantes’s novel is in
part a parody of the romances, it also tends to parody imperial designs.
While kings were able to put on amazing spectacles, Don Quixote
would make a spectacle of himself, breaking his lance against a
windmill or losing teeth to muleteers.
In the Prologue to Don Quixote, a friend comes to the aid of the
befuddled ‘author’, suggesting that he include, among other
adornments, allusions that he can annotate. Cervantes makes it appear
as if many of the examples given by the friend are then inserted into
the text. Names such as Cacus and Goliath will be found by the careful
reader—but of course, the Prologue was written last, and these names
were already present in the novel. One of the friend’s functions is to
alert us to the importance of allusion. As Carolyn Nadeau has
explained, the six women listed in the Prologue are used in very
interesting and complex ways in the novel, being metamorphosed into
actual characters.44 But these women come from specific authors:
Antonio de Guevara, Homer, Ovid, and Virgil. The list immediately
alerts us to their relation to empire. Let us recall that Guevara wrote
most of his works for Charles V, ‘for an already powerful monarch who
needed the wisdom to know how to use his power’.45 To accomplish
this, he repeatedly utilized examples from Roman Emperors. Turning to
the three classical writers, they are all known for their epic poems, all
of which, in one way or another, dealt with empire. Thus, even though
Cervantes asks that six women be included, they are all tied to empire.
If we glance at the other allusions that the friend suggests, they all
relate to the imperial.46 To cite Cacus means to consider his foe,
Hercules, said to be the founder of the Spanish monarchy and often
associated with Iberia; to cite Goliath is to turn to David, a biblical king
often used to laud Philip II; to cite Julius Caesar serves to remind the
reader of Pero Mexía and all the writers who consider the Habsburgs as
new Caesars; and to cite Alexander the Great means to evoke one of the
great emperors of the past.47
The friend in the Prologue, then, insists on citations that are
concerned with empire, thus foregrounding its importance in the text.
Indeed, Don Quixote, from the start of the novel, wants to be more than
a knight: ‘Imaginábase el pobre ya coronado por el valor de su brazo,
por lo menos del imperio de Trapisonda’ [‘The poor gentleman already
imagined himself at least crowned Emperor of Trapisonda.’]48
Trapisonda or Trebizond is no mere exotic appellation. The Empire of
Trebizond, whose capital was on the Black Sea, was one of the four
parts into which the original Byzantine Empire was divided, and it
survived the fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Empire in 1453,
becoming the last of the Greco-Christian Asian empires to be conquered
by the Turks. Thus, Don Quixote wishes to be more than even emperor
of the Byzantine Empire; he wishes to be emperor of the place that
survived its fall. Here, Cervantes melds history with the romances of
chivalry. In La Trapesonda, for example, Reinaldos de Montalván
becomes king of Trebizond and must fight the moors.49 This interest in
Trebizond continues until the last vestiges of the popularity of the
books of chivalry. A fragment of a chivalric manuscript from 1638 is
called Clarís de Trapisonda [Clarís from Trebizond].50 This interest in
Trebizond is then a reflection of the nostalgia for a time when these
were Christian lands. But in making Don Quixote into such a weak and
imaginative figure, Cervantes’s novel may be saying that such imperial
aims are impossible and even laughable.
Cervantes’s utilization of Alexander the Great, of the Byzantine
Empire and the Roman Empire also serves to point to the notion of
translatio imperii. Although there are many versions of the concept,
writers envisioned the rise and fall of empires, starting in the east, and
then moving to the west, that is, to Rome (a site that became the
symbolic centre of the last empire).51 If empire does not halt with the
Virgilian image of an eternal Rome, and later with the Holy Roman
Empire of Charlemagne and his followers, then Spain, being the
westernmost European kingdom, might be heir to empire. Antonio de
Nebrija expresses his concern that ‘just as the decline of empires had
led to linguistic corruption and oblivion, the same thing could happen
to Spain if the cycle were to be repeated’.52 His grammar would seek to
halt any future translatio. But again, Don Quixote is a most awkward
embodiment of this new empire. In order to sally forth, he dons ‘unas
armas que habían sido de sus bisabuelos, que tomadas de orín y llenas
de moho, luengos siglos había que estaban puestas en un rincón’
[‘armour, which had been his great-great grandfather’s, and being
mouldy and rust-eaten, had lain by, many long years, forgotten in a
corner’].53 Since Don Quixote was published under Philip III, the
grandson of Charles V, the old armour could well be pointing to that
moment in time when knighthood was revived and when there was a
dream of universal empire. Don Quixote, then, can be read through its
playful or even subversive use of epic, one that links its main character
to Charles V and to other imperial rulers of the past such as Alexander,
Julius Caesar, Augustus, and Charlemagne.
Over the centuries, critics have debated whether Don Quixote is to be
viewed as an embodiment of the deeds and imperial conceptions of
Charles V or as a satire on this emperor’s ideals—or even perhaps as a
commentary of the decline of empire in the last years of Philip II and
the reign of Philip III. In 1878, Díaz de Benjumea had already referred
to critics of the previous century who claimed that Don Quixote ‘era el
retrato del alma española, la pintura de Carlos V’ [was the portrait of
the Spanish soul, the painting of Charles V].54 Perhaps the most
complete and engaging comparison of Charles and Don Quixote was
elaborated by José Antonio Maravall. In the 1948 version of the book,
he claims that Cervantes, as well as the protagonist, partook of a
utopian imperial vision.55 But years later, Maravall changed his view,
demonstrating instead in 1991 how Cervantes’s text is actually a
critique of Don Quixote’s utopianism.56 One clue as to this critique of
an imperial vision can be found in the fact that the first name ever
given to the gentleman from La Mancha is ‘Quijada’ which means
jaw.57 Towards the end of the 1605 novel, Don Quixote brags that he
descends from ‘los valientes españoles Pedro Barba y Gutierre Quijada’
[‘those courageous Spaniards Pedro de Barba and Gutierre Quixada’].58
This word is key to portraits of Charles V. Titian, who was chosen to
paint him repeatedly, had a difficult time since ‘we know that the
ruler’s extremely deformed jaw did not permit the upper and lower
teeth to meet or the mouth to close’.59 Titian solved this and other
problems 
to 
the 
emperor’s 
satisfaction. 
Cervantes, 
however,
foregrounds the jaw to show how the knight’s determination leads to
failure and thus parodies representations of the emperor.
During the ten years that elapsed between the publication of Part I
and the second part of Don Quixote, Cervantes published several works,
of which the Novelas ejemplares is the most important. A collection of
twelve lengthy novellas in the Italian manner, they are each one
inventive and original. I will only discuss two of them. El amante liberal
tells us much about the wars in the Mediterranean. Here the would-be
lovers, Leonisa and Ricardo are tossed from island to island, starting
out in Sicily and telling us much about the geography of the
Mediterranean and its conflictive yet intertwined cultures. The novella
has a striking beginning, with Ricardo meeting his old friend Mahamut,
now a Sicilian renegade, in Cyprus. Ricardo’s melancholy stems from
his captivity and the loss of his beloved, but is reinforced by the ruins
of Nicosia, once a Christian city now destroyed by the Turks. In a
multicultural moment, the captive and the renegade profess their
continued friendship—they were both born and raised in Sicily and had
been friends since childhood. We are also surprised by the power held
by the renegade, something that contrasts with a rigid hierarchical
structure in Spain, and one that demeans the Other. More than that,
Mahamut represents the opposite of the Orientalist view of the Turk
(cruel, deceiving, lustful, and avaricious). While Muslims and Jews
fight over the beauty of Leonisa, Mahamut, as the perfect friend, finds
ways to rescue his friend and his beloved.60 The Sicilian renegade
becomes a go-between and a cultural broker, being able to move
between two worlds, a porous space where Christians are disguised as
Moors and vice versa.61 There is, then, a certain degree of tolerance in
this novella set right in the midst of the storm, the place of conflict
where two empires are pitted against each other.
La española inglesa returns us one more time to the sack of Cadiz by
the English, as we witnessed in an early poem. The sack is just as brutal
and Spanish response just as weak. But once the English return home
with a captive girl, Isabela, the whole action is transformed as she is
raised in a home of secret Catholics. Isabela is raised with the family’s
son, Ricaredo, who at first loves her ‘como si fuera su hermana’ [as if
she were his sister], and later asks her to become his wife.62 But just
then the queen, hearing about this Spanish-English woman, calls her to
court. Cervantes inserts a curious astronomical description of Isabela
precisely at the moment in the work when historicity gives way to
anachronism. The real Queen Elizabeth is dead, and yet we are
presented with two Isabelas, the queen and the captive, who mirror
each other throughout the narrative, establishing what Carroll Johnson
calls a ‘reversibility’ of images.63 In a rather subtle way, Cervantes, in
La española inglesa, is anticipating the modern alternate-world novels,
which develop a ‘what if’ historical situation. This new queen, alive
after the celestial conjunction of 1603, is a tolerant and sympathetic
figure.64 Thus, in the two novellas that we have viewed, Cervantes
seems to envision a more tolerant world, one where reversibility and
reciprocity might lead to peace.
Part II of Cervantes’s novel, published only two years after the
Novelas ejemplares, is a much darker continuation of his earlier text.
Here, Don Quixote has lost most of his drive and imagination and is
controlled by others who, having read Part I (and even the ‘false’ Part II
by Avellaneda) seem intent on enjoying themselves at his expense.
While the duke and duchess seem to be at first all that the knight
would have wished for, aristocratic patrons to help him in his career
(they do provide Sancho with the Isle of Barataria), they turn out to be
something quite different. David Quint notes that they are
‘representatives of a class habituated to exercising its power on the
bodies of others’.65 As part of their ‘frivolity’ they make Don Quixote
and Sancho into ‘toys’.66 Henry Sullivan, who sees this episode as part
of Quixote’s purgatorial passage, labels their abode a ‘theater of
sadism’.67 More to our point is Anthony J. Cascardi’s assertion that this
is a critique of aristocratic decadence.68 This new world into which the
knight enters becomes emblematic of a decadent society where
imperial wars are of little concern, while its soldiers are but toys in a
game that is watched with indolence and even cruelty. Perhaps it is not
his defeat or his loss of Dulcinea that leads Don Quixote to return to his
former self. The new world he faces may be too much to bear. Empire
and its struggles have become a theatre, an entertainment, while
prophecies of doom echo in the chambers of power.
Cervantes had one more work of fiction to write, one more step to
take in order to become a Virgilian figure. Having written his eclogue
and several apprenticeships to epic, he now turns to Heliodorus and the
Greek novel to pen his final work, published posthumously in 1617.
Persiles y Sigismunda, although a book about the perils of two lovers, is
also an epic—commentators of the period came to recognize the Greek
novel as epic in prose. These works rival the chivalric, rejecting all the
accusations that were heaped on them. They may be encyclopaedic, but
never monstrous. They hardly serve for pure political propaganda,
since their matters are subtler. A careful look at Cervantes’s intricate
novel shows that it is about political rivalries and kingdoms in crisis. It
is an epic in prose that deals with questions of the moment, such as the
debate over ‘barbarians’, be they in the northern lands or in the
Indies;69 and it delves into ‘what it meant to be an ideal ruler’.70 In
Book III we encounter the hermit Soldino who has retired from active
life after serving Emperor Charles V. He is versed in astrology and has a
bent for the prophetic (predicting the victory at Lepanto). It is as if
Cervantes, now looking at life from a more detached perspective, seeks
to consider what is best for the empire, what kinds of rulers are needed,
what kinds of ideas. He also seems to emphasize marriage as a way to
further imperial ambitions over war. In many ways the novel is a
summa of his wisdom, given gently, and in a more optimistic manner
than in the second part of Don Quixote.
From the birth of empire in Numancia to the shocking and incisive
words of his sonnet on the catafalque of Philip II; from his desire for a
crusade against the pirates of the Barberry Coast in El trato de Argel to
his image of an alternate world where a more benefic Queen Elizabeth
can have commerce with Catholics; and from the witty and inspiring
Part I of Don Quixote, which can even be read in terms of imperial
determination, to the bleak outlook of Part II where people and soldiers
are toys for a tired empire; Cervantes is constantly thinking of his own
milieu and how to bring about transformation through fiction; how an
imperial space can become less imperious and more inclusive.
Works Cited
Armstrong-Roche, Michael. Cervantes’s Epic Novel: Empire, Religion and the Dream
of Life of Heroes in Persiles (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2009).
Avalle-Arce, Juan Bautista. ‘Poesía, historia, imperialism: La Numancia’. Anuario
de Letras 2 (1962): pp. 55–75.
Botello, Jesús. Cervantes, Felipe II y la España del Siglo de Oro. Biblioteca Áurea
Hispánica 111 (Madrid/Frankfurt, Iberoamericana/Vervuert, 2016).
Botello, Jesús. ‘Don Quijote, Felipe II y la tecnología de la escritura’. Cervantes:
Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 29, no. 1 (2009): pp. 197–207.
Braudel, Ferdinand. The Mediterranean: And the Mediterranean World in the Age
of Philip II, translated by Sian Reynolds, 2 vols. (Los Angeles and Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1995).
Canavaggio, Jean. Cervantes, translated by J. R. Jones (New York and London:
W. W. Norton and Company, 1990).
Carr, Matthew. Blood and Faith: The Purging of Muslim Spain (New York and
London: The New Press, 2009).
Cascardi, Anthony J. Cervantes, Literature, and the Discourse of Politics (Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 2012).
Cascardi, Anthony J. ‘Don Quixote and the Invention of the Novel’. In The
Cambridge Companion to Cervantes, edited by Cascardi (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2002), pp. 58–79.
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Don Quijote de la Mancha, edited by Francisco
Rico (Madrid: Punto de Lectura, 2007).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Don Quixote, translated by Charles Jarvis
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. La Galatea, edited by Francisco López Estrada
and María Teresa López García-Berdoy (Madrid: Cátedra, 1995).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Novelas ejemplares, edited by Jorge García López
(Barcelona: Crítica, 2001).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Poesías, edited by Adrián J. Sáez (Madrid:
Cátedra, 2016).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Teatro completo, edited by Florencio Sevilla
Arroyo y Antonio Rey Hazas (Barcelona: Planeta, 1987).
Collado, Francisco Gerónimo. Descripción Del Túmulo y Relación De Las Exequias
Que Hizo La Ciudad De Sevilla En La Muerte Del Rey Don Felipe Segvndo, edited
by Francisco de Borja Palomo (Sevilla: Imp. de d. J. M. Geofrin, 1869).
Dandelet, Thomas James. The Renaissance of Empire in Early Modern Europe
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014).
De Armas, Frederick A. ‘Cervantes and the Virgilian Wheel: The Portrayal of a
Literary Career’. In European Literary Careers: The Author from Antiquity to the
Renaissance, edited by Patrick Cheney and De Armas (Toronto: University of
Toronto Press, 2002): pp. 268–85.
De Armas, Frederick A. Cervantes, Raphael and the Classics (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1998).
De Armas, Frederick A. ‘Heretical Stars: The Politics of Astrology in Cervantes’s
La Gitanilla and La española inglesa’. In Material and Symbolic Circulation
between Spain and England, 1554–1604, edited by Anne J. Cruz (Burlington,
VT: Ashgate, 2008), pp. 89–100.
De Armas, Frederick A. Quixotic Frescoes: Cervantes and Italian Renaissance Art
(Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2006).
De Armas, Frederick A. ‘Vidas Paralelas: Don Quijote y Alejandro Magno’.
Cuadernos Hispanoamericanos 790 (2016): pp. 32–47.
De Armas Wilson, Diana. Allegories of Love: Cervantes’s Persiles y Sigismunda
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1991).
Díaz de Benjumea, don Nicolás. La verdad sobre el Quijote (Madrid: Gaspar,
1878; rppt Barcelona: Ediciones Rondas, 1986).
Domínguez, Julia. ‘Los escenarios de la memoria: psicodrama en El trato de Argel
de Cervantes’. Bulletin of the Comediantes 61, no. 1 (2009): pp. 1–24.
Eisenberg, Daniel and María Carmen Marín Pina. Bibliografía de los libros de
caballerías castellanos (Zaragoza: Prensas Universitarias de Zaragoza, 2000).
Fernández, Enrique. ‘Los tratos de Argel: obra testimonial, denuncia política y
literatura terapéutica’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America
20, no. 1 (2000): pp. 7–26.
Garcés, María Antonia. ‘“Alabado por sus acciones”: Mahmud siciliano en El
amante liberal’. eHumanista/Cervantes 2 (2013): 427–61.
Garcés, María Antonia. Cervantes in Algiers: A Captive’s Tale (Nashville:
Vanderbilt University Press, 2002).
Garza Merino, Sonia. La Trapesonda: Guía de lectura (Alcalá de Henares: Centro
de Estudios Cervantinos, 2002).
Gil-Oslé, Juan Pablo. ‘Escipión, la amistad y la masculinidad cristiano-
musulmana en El amante liberal de Cervantes’. In ‘Novelar en lengua castellana’:
estudios sobre la novela corta del Siglo de Oro. Lejana: Revista Crítica de
Narrativa Breve 7 (2014): pp. 1–11.
Gonzalo Sánchez-Molero, José Luis. ‘Felipe II, Princeps Hispaniarum: La
castellanización de un príncipe Habsburgo (1527–47)’. Manuscrits: Revista
d’història moderna (1998): pp. 65–85.
González Echevarría, Roberto. Cervantes’s Don Quixote (New Haven and
London: Yale University Press, 2015).
Johnson, Carroll B. Cervantes and the Material World (Urbana-Champaign:
University of Illinois Press, 2000).
Johnson, Carroll B. ‘La Numancia and the Structure of Cervantine Ambiguity’.
Ideologies and Literature 3 (1980): pp. 74–94.
Kahn, Aaron M. The Ambivalence of Imperial Discourse: Cervantes’s La Numancia
within the ‘Lost Generation’ of Spanish Drama (1570–90) (New York: Peter
Lang, 2008).
Laguna, Ana María G. Cervantes and the Pictorial Imagination (Lewisburg:
Bucknell University Press, 2009).
Lewis-Smith, Paul. ‘Cervantes’s Numancia as Tragedy and Tragicomedy’. Bulletin
of Hispanic Studies 64 (1987): pp. 15–25.
Martín, Adrienne Laskier. Cervantes and the Burlesque Sonnet (Berkeley and Los
Angeles: University of California Press, 1991).
Maravall, José Antonio. El humanismo de las armas en Don Quijote (Madrid:
Instituto de estudios Políticos, 1948).
Maravall, José Antonio. Utopia and Counterutopia in the Quijote, translated by
Robert W. Felkel (Detroit, MI: Wayne State University Press, 1991).
Moreno Hernández, Carlos. ‘El “jirón lusitano” en La Numancia: Siglo de Oro e
imperio católico’. Bulletin of Hispanic Studies 89, no. 1 (2012): pp. 15–30.
Nadeau, Carolyn A. Women of the Prologue: Imitation, Myth and Magic in Don
Quixote, I (Lewisburg, PA: Bucknell University Press, 2002).
Navarrete, Ignacio. Orphans of Petrarch: Poetry and Theory in the Spanish
Renaissance (Berkeley, Los Angeles and London: University of California Press,
1994).
Nebrija, Antonio de. Gramática castellana, edited by Pascual Galindo Romero
and Luis Ortiz Muñoz (Madrid: Edición de la Junta Centenario, 1946).
Panofsky, Erwin. Problems in Titian. Mostly Iconographic (New York: New York
University Press, 1969).
Parker, Geoffrey. Imprudent King: A New Life of Philip II (New Haven and
London: Yale University Press, 2014).
Quint, David. Cervantes’s Novel of Modern Times: A New Reading of Don Quijote
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003).
Quint, David. Epic and Empire: Politics and Generic Form from Virgil to Milton
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993).
Rosenthal, E. ‘Plus Ultra, Non plus Ultra, and the Columnar Device of Emperor
Charles V’. Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes 34 (1971): pp. 204–
28.
Ruiz, Teófilo F. A King Travels: Festive Traditions in Late Medieval and Early
Modern Spain (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2012).
Rupp, Stephen. Cervantes and the Literature of War: Heroic Forms (Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 2014).
Stoops, Rosa Maria. ‘Elizabeth I of England As Mercurian Monarch in Miguel de
Cervantes’s La española inglesa’. Bulletin of Spanish Studies 88, no. 2 (2011):
pp. 177–97.
Sullivan, Henry W. Grotesque Purgatory: A Study of Cervantes’s Don Quijote, Part
II (University Park, Pennsylvania: The Pennsylvania State University Press:
1996).
Tanner, Marie. The Last Descendants of Aeneas: The Hapsburgs and the Mythic
Image of the Emperor (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1993).
Wethey, Harold. The Paintings of Titian, Vol 2. The Portraits (London: Phaidon,
1971).
1 Dandelet, p. 75.
2 Rosenthal, p. 209.
3 On Titian see Panofsky, p. 86 and De Armas, Quixotic Frescoes, pp. 117–33.
On Leoni see Laguna, pp. 117–18.
4 Dandelet, p. 107.
5 Dandelet, pp. 140–5; pp. 165–7; p. 173.
6 Gonzalo Sánchez-Molero, p. 84. This critic also argues that an excess of
Castilian pride instilled in Philip offended Aragonese and Catalan writers.
7 De Armas, Quixotic Frescoes, p. 4.
8 Cascardi, ‘Don Quixote…, p. 71.
9 Garcés, Cervantes in Algiers, pp. 160–1.
10 Carr, p. 122.
11 Canavaggio, p. 121.
12 Domínguez, p. 6.
13 Garcés, Cervantes in Algiers, pp. 160–1.
14 Braudel, vol. II, pp. 841–3.
15 Fernández, p. 14.
16 Cervantes, Teatro completo, ll.1343–4.
17 All translations into English are from the author of this chapter unless
otherwise noted.
18 Rupp, pp. 104–5.
19 Johnson, ‘La Numancia…’, p. 79.
20 De Armas, Cervantes, Raphael,…, pp. 97–115.
21 Avalle-Arce, p. 59.
22 De Armas, Cervantes, Raphael,…, pp. 119–25.
23 Kahn, p. 23.
24 Cervantes, Teatro completo, ll.517–20.
25 De Armas, Cervantes, Raphael,…, p. 133. See also Moreno Hernández.
26 De Armas, Cervantes, Raphael,…, pp. 77–96. On this controversy see also
Lewis-Smith.
27 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 156.
28 For a detailed explanation of Cervantes’s career in terms of Virgil, see De
Armas, Cervantes and…
29 Quint, Epic and Empire, p. 8.
30 Tanner, pp. 119–45.
31 Cervantes, Poesías, p. 182. Philip had already been likened to King David
when he was acclaimed King of Portugal (Parker, p. 271).
32 Cervantes, Poesías, p. 187.
33 Martín, p. 93.
34 Johnson, Cervantes…, p. 159.
35 Martín, pp. 95–6; Cervantes, p. 198.
36 Botello, Cervantes, Felipe II…, pp. 85–9.
37 Martín, p. 105.
38 Collado, pp. 113–19.
39 For a brief description and analysis see Botello, Cervantes, Felipe II…, pp.
86–8.
40 Cervantes, Poesías, pp. 203–4.
41 Martin, pp. 105–6.
42 Martín, p. 108.
43 Ruiz, p. 23.
44 Nadeau, p. 19.
45 Dandelet, p. 89.
46 See Cervantes, Don Quijote, p. 13; Don Quixote, p. 18.
47 See De Armas, ‘Vidas paralelas’.
48 Cervantes, Don Quijote, p. 31; p. 23.
49 Garza Merino, pp. 28–9.
50 Eisenberg and Marín Pina, p. 460.
51 Navarrete, p. 20.
52 Navarrete, pp. 21–2.
53 Cervantes, Don Quixote, p. 31; p. 23.
54 Díaz de Benjumea, p. 124.
55 Maravall, El humanismo…, p. ix.
56 Maraval, Utopia…, p. 17.
57 Cervantes, Don Quixote, p. 28; p. 21; De Armas, Quixotic Frescoes, p. 118.
58 Cervantes, Don Quixote, p. 507; p. 438.
59 Wethey, p. 19.
60 Gil-Oslé, p. 7.
61 Garcés, ‘“Alabado por…’, pp. 427, 438.
62 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, p. 219.
63 Johnson, Cervantes and…, pp. 175–6.
64 De Armas, ‘Heretical…’, pp. 89–100. The alchemical images in the novella
go hand in hand with the astrological in order to show a harmonious coming
together (See Stoops).
65 Quint, Cervantes’s Novel…, p. 136.
66 González Echevarría, p. 258.
67 Sullivan, p. ix.
68 Cascardi, Cervantes, Literature…, pp. 160, 171.
69 De Armas Wilson, p. 110.
70 Armstrong-Roche, p. 13.
Chapter 4
Captivity in Cervantes
María Antonia Garcés
Cornell University
Captivity: ‘The worst evil a man can
experience’
Por la libertad, así como por la honra, se puede y se debe
aventurar la vida, y, por el contrario, el cautiverio es el mayor mal
que puede venir a los hombres.
[In the case of freedom, as in the case of honour, one can and
should risk life itself, and, on the contrary, captivity is the worst
evil a man can experience.]1
Don Quixote makes this assertion after leaving the palace of the duke
and duchess, in the second part of Cervantes’s masterpiece. Clearly,
Don Quixote’s words do not necessarily coincide with those of
Cervantes, but in this case, their significance is striking. Cervantes’s
obsession with freedom and its opposite, captivity, evokes his long
incarceration in Algiers (1575–80). In effect, the capture of the soldier
Miguel de Cervantes by Barbary corsairs in 1575 and the five years he
spent as a captive in Algiers left an indelible impression on his fiction.
From the first works written after his liberation, such as his play El
trato de Argel and his novel La Galatea, to his posthumous book Los
trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda, the story of this traumatic experience
continuously resonates throughout his work. The motif of captivity
characterizes Cervantes’s autobiographical narrative, La historia del
cautivo, interpolated in Don Quixote I.39–41, as well as two of his
novellas, El amante liberal and La española inglesa. Concurrently, his
Barbary plays, such as El trato de Argel, mentioned earlier, Los baños de
Argel, El gallardo español, and La gran sultana turn around the theme of
captivity suffered by Christians in Ottoman territories during the early
modern period.
Because the relationship between autobiography and fiction are
central to the theme of captivity in Cervantes, this essay initially
examines Cervantes’s military career in the Mediterranean and his
participation in the Battle of Lepanto (1571). At the same time, I
explore the soldier’s experience as a captive in Algiers and the way that
this topic reappears in his fiction. Nevertheless, it is impossible to cover
the colossal bibliography elicited by the subject of captivity in
Cervantes. Rather than comprehensive, then, this chapter is illustrative
of classic and current scholarship regarding this motif in the Spanish
writer’s fiction.
Lepanto: ‘The Sea and Fire Were One’
In 1571, following the Ottoman conquest of Cyprus (1570), a Venetian
territory in the Eastern Mediterranean, Pope Pius V steered the
formation of a confederation of Christian states against Islam. The
impressive armada of the Holy League, consisting of more than 300
ships and some 84,000 men aboard, confronted a large Ottoman fleet in
the Gulf of Lepanto (Naupaktos) on 7 October 1571. As a harquebusier
on the galley Marquesa, Cervantes fought valiantly in this battle. In
spite of being sick with fever, he led a group of soldiers onto the launch
emplacement, located at the front of the ship. An eyewitness states: ‘the
battle was so bloody and horrendous that it seemed that the sea and
fire were one’.2 During the repeated attacks of the enemy, the Marquesa
suffered forty dead, including the captain, and 120 wounded. Cervantes
received three harquebus wounds, two in the chest and a third one in
his left hand. The Battle of Lepanto was the turning point in the war
between the Ottoman and Habsburg Empires. The Christian allies
obtained an overwhelming victory over the Turks, who lost 30,000 men
dead or wounded and 8,000 prisoners.3 Years later, Cervantes would
refer to this battle as ‘the most memorable and highest occasion that
the past centuries saw and future centuries will ever see’.4 After four
years in military service, he decided to return to Spain, and after
obtaining letters of recommendation from the Duke of Sessa and Don
John of Austria, Cervantes sailed from Naples, in the galley Sol. Some
days later, a terrible storm scattered the Spanish fleet, and on 26
September 1575, Barbary corsairs attacked the galley Sol along the
Catalan coast, transporting the surviving passengers to Algiers.
Cervantes’s military career thus coincided with a period of conflicts
across the Mediterranean world, when the clashes between the
Habsburg and Ottoman Empires reached their peak. Like hundreds of
Spanish and Italian soldiers and travellers in the sixteenth century,
Cervantes suffered the brutality of war in the Mediterranean and the
vicissitudes of captivity in Barbary. The future author, however, would
leave us a vivid literary testimony about such events.5 Certainly,
Cervantes’s experience as a captive in the slave-prisons of Algiers, his
relations with Muslims and renegades, and his encounters with
different cultures and religions allowed him to examine these issues
from a unique vantage point. As I have shown elsewhere, captivity was
a life-changing experience for the writer.6
Captivity in Algiers
In 1575, when Cervantes arrived, Algiers was a prosperous urban
centre of about 100,000 inhabitants, which held in its slave-prisons
some 25,000 captives from every country in Europe. The city was a
crossroads of civilizations, peopled by a sophisticated multicultural
society consisting of Turks, Arabs, Berbers, Christian captives, Jews,
exiled Moriscos, and renegades. Antonio de Sosa, a cleric and friend of
Cervantes imprisoned in Algiers, states that around 1580, more than
half of the inhabitants of Algiers were ‘Turks by profession’, that is,
Christian converts to Islam.7
After his capture, Miguel fell into the hands of the Greek corsair Dali
Mami, surnamed ‘the Cripple’, who demanded the exorbitant sum of
five hundred gold escudos as the price of ransom. The letters of
recommendation found on the Spaniard led his captors to believe that
he was an important figure, worthy of a high ransom. The future
author would always recall the image of his arrival in Algiers, with
poignant words pronounced by Saavedra in El trato de Argel: ‘When I
arrived a captive, and saw this land, renowned in the world, whose
bosom conceals…such a throng of pirates, I could not keep from
crying’.8
The Algerians imprisoned Cervantes with other elite captives in the
bagnio or slave-prison of the governor of Algiers. Because he did not
have access to the sum of money set for his ransom, he attempted to
escape four times during the period of his captivity. In January or
February 1576, he tried to reach the Spanish garrison of Orán by
walking through the wilderness with some friends. After their guide
abandoned them, the fugitives had to return to Algiers, where
Cervantes was beaten and put in chains.9 A year later, he took fourteen
Christian captives and hid them in a cave outside the city, where they
spent some five months waiting for the arrival of a frigate from
Mallorca. Yet a renegade betrayed them; armed guards then seized
them and ‘shackled Miguel de Cervantes’, the organizer of the plot.10
In March 1578, he sent a letter to the governor of Orán, Don Martín
de Córdoba, requesting his help to escape. Some spies, however, caught
the messenger and returned him to Algiers, where Hasan Pasha ordered
him impaled. Then in September 1579, Cervantes organized the escape
of sixty Christian captives, who were to flee in an armed frigate secretly
bought by friends. This time another captive betrayed them. After
threatening Cervantes with execution, Hasan Pasha granted him life
again, but incarcerated the captive in his own palace. A Spanish
renegade called Morat Ra’is Maltrapillo is presumed to have intervened
to save Cervantes’s life.11
Through the great efforts of his family, complemented by funds
collected by the Trinitarian Order, Cervantes obtained his ransom for
500 gold ducats on 19 September 1580. Devoted to the rescue of
Christian captives in Muslim territories, this monastic order obtained
funds from charities and the families of persons imprisoned in Barbary.
At the time, Cervantes was thirty-three years old; he had spent almost
ten years as a soldier in Philip II’s armadas and as a captive in Algiers.
Years later, through his spokesperson Ruy Pérez, the author evoked the
taste of freedom: ‘There is no happiness on earth to compare with
recovering lost liberty.’12 During his life, Cervantes testified several
times about his captivity, such as in the Información de Argel, a
notarized document composed in 1580 in Algiers. The most eloquent
testimonies to this traumatic experience, however, are those embedded
in his fiction.
Many critics have alluded to the marks left on Cervantes by his
North African captivity. ‘It was the most transcendental event in his
spiritual career’, affirmed Américo Castro, referring to this shattering
experience.13 Nevertheless, as Donald McCrory indicates, although his
biographers consistently refer to Cervantes’s confinement in Algiers,
they generally do not delve into the subject: ‘And yet for Cervantes,
five years in a foreign gaol proved unforgettable. They left an indelible
mark on his soul.’14 Juan Goytisolo proposes that this event constitutes
the fantastic vortex or whirlwind at the centre of Cervantes’s fictions.
My book Cervantes in Algiers: A Captive’s Tale (2002, 2005) examines
Cervantes’s captivity in the Mediterranean city where he spent five
years as a prisoner. I also explore the afterlife of his Algerian
encounters in his fiction, from La Galatea to Persiles. Because the re-
enactment of the traumatic experience in Cervantes generally ‘produces
an outburst of fantasy’, I have suggested that the depictions of captivity
in these works function both as an artistic testimony and as a stimulus
for creation.15
El trato de Argel
As a playwright Cervantes ‘was as experimental in his time as Brecht,
Ionesco, or Arrabal’ in the twentieth century.16 His play El trato de
Argel, also known as Los tratos de Argel, inaugurated Cervantes’s career
as a dramatist in 1583. The author initiated his new profession by
returning to the city of Algiers, ‘a universal haven for pirates and a
shelter and refuge for thieves’, as he calls the capital of privateering in
Persiles.17 As a testimony to the ordeals of captivity, El trato gave the
Spanish public ‘the first realist staging of the lives of captives’.18
Antonio Rey Hazas proposes that both El trato and Los baños de Argel
‘are the literary result of an inescapable vital experience, impossible to
forget’.19 Cervantes thus ‘inaugurated a sort of mini-theatrical genre’
that he himself improved and enriched.20
Testifying for the first time in Spain to the sufferings of Christian
captives in Barbary, El trato represents ‘a vivid, painful, and tragic
account of the tortures of captivity in Algiers’.21 Through his
spokesperson Aurelio, Cervantes characterizes El trato as ‘a reflection of
life’ in this North African city.22 Evoking with precision the ordeals of
Christian captives in Barbary—the corsair raids, the auctions of human
beings, the tortures and tribulations endured by white slaves, the love
affairs, apostasies, successful or failed escapes, and ransom—the play
presents a vast tableau of captivity in Barbary. The vision of captivity
that emerges in El trato, moreover, coincides with the historical and
ethnographic data contained in Topografía e historia natural de Argel
(1612), composed by Antonio de Sosa.
Yet Cervantes also superimposes various literary models on his
Algerian reminiscences, particularly that of the Byzantine novel, the
structure of which cements the plot of El trato. Beginning with this
drama, most captivity plays by Cervantes present Spanish captives
suffering from a double loss of freedom—that is, they are both
imprisoned and in love.23 Such characters are physically and
emotionally captives, a formula that extends to El amante liberal. In
these works, Cervantes includes love crossings between Moorish and
Christian couples, taken from the Greek novel.
Among other effects of captivity, El trato portrays the temptation to
apostatize and ‘turn Turk’, as well as the lure of sexual attraction to
Muslim women. The character Leonardo, for instance, has become his
mistress’s lover, while Aurelio—a double of Cervantes—is enticed to
sleep with his owner Zahara. Yet, the appearance of a Spaniard,
significantly named Pedro, who has decided to apostatize albeit only in
appearance to gain his liberty, is treated with great sympathy and
compassion by Saavedra, who stands as another alter-ego of
Cervantes.24
In fact, the playwright was the first to describe the tribulations that
moved Christian captives to apostatize, as well as the appeal of Islam
for the Christian population of Algiers. Recall that, in the 1570s, more
than half of the inhabitants of the city were renegades. Called Les
chrétiens d’Allah [Christians for Allah] by Bartolomé and Lucille
Bennassar, most of these men, women, or children, born and brought
up in the Christian faith, apostatized to acquire freedom and, often,
financial rewards and social stability. The number of these renegades
apparently exceeded that of all the Moors, Turks, and Jews of Algiers.
El trato, moreover, puts forward an exaltation of Spanish national
values. Spanish captives are the most valorous, the most faithful to
Christianity, and the most daring when attempting to escape.25 Not all
Spaniards, however, show exemplary behaviour in this drama.26 As
mentioned earlier, the cynic character Pedro reveals his plans to
apostatize in order to lead a better life, while other converts to Islam
appear on the stage, such as the renegade Yusuf, an important member
of Algerian society. In this sense, various critics have underscored the
paradoxes of El trato, such as the repetitive contradictions between the
defence and criticism of Christian orthodoxy.27 Natalio Ohanna has
highlighted the ideological ambiguities of El trato, which suggest a
more 
complex 
representation 
of 
Algerian 
reality, 
particularly
concerning Muslim-Christian relations and the methods used in Spain
to punish apostasy. In fact, some characters reveal their intolerance of
Muslims. Sebastián contrasts the ‘just punishment’ suffered by the
Morisco Alicax, burnt alive in Valencia for embracing Islam, with the
‘illicit’ vengeance perpetrated on a Spanish priest in Algiers in
retaliation for this death. In the play, Sebastián views Alicax’s
execution as morally correct, while the killing of the priest in Algiers is
cruel and barbarous. The gory descriptions of these deaths, however,
would imply a critical commentary regarding the penalties imposed by
the Inquisition on Christian apostates.28 The sufferings and deaths of
Christian captives, dramatized by various scenes of El trato, turn this
drama into a collective testimony of captivity.
La Galatea
In Cervantes, the reappearances of the captivity motif frequently
recreate the author’s own capture on the galley Sol and the storm
associated with that event, a scene repeated across the writer’s fiction.
The recurrent tempest, with the ensuing corsair attack on a Spanish
galleon and the dramatic capture of the passengers, appears first in El
trato de Argel.29 Another compelling testimonial passage comes from La
Galatea, a pastoral novel published in 1585. Timbrio, a young man
from Jeréz, recounts the horrible storm that interrupted his sea journey
from Naples to Spain. In effect, a violent tempest descended upon his
galley, and ‘in the two days that the mistral lasted, we sped by all the
islands on that course without being able to take shelter’.30
To be sure, the story of the ship swept out to sea by a violent storm
recalls Cervantes’s own crossing as he sailed from Naples to Barcelona
in September 1575, a storm that led to his capture by Algerian corsairs.
In La Galatea, however, the tempest sends the galley back to Gaeta,
near Naples, where it is repaired. When Timbrio sails again, his ship
encounters a squadron of fifteen Turkish-Algerian galliots. Again, the
commander of the enemy fleet is Arnaut Mami—the same corsair who
captured Cervantes. Timbrio sums up the combat: ‘After the captain
and nearly all the crew of the ship had been killed, after nine assaults,
the Turks furiously boarded the ship.’31
Yet Timbrio’s story in La Galatea has a fortunate ending, thanks to a
second tempest that occurs after the corsair assault. Furious winds and
enormous waves now crash against the Algerian galliots, scattering
them over the sea and flooding the vessel carrying Timbrio and his
captors. The next day, they find themselves near the coasts of
Catalonia, where their ship crashes against the rocks and the captives
are liberated. This is the very Catalan coast where Cervantes lost his
freedom. Paradoxically, the Catalan armed guards who repel the enemy
not only massacre most of the Turks, but also plunder the Christian
captives.
The Captive’s Tale
La historia del cautivo, interpolated in Don Quixote, I.39–41, offers an
ideal venue for the study of the border between autobiography and
fiction in the author’s works. Narrated by Captain Ruy Pérez de
Viedma, an alter ego of Cervantes, this tale describes the vicissitudes of
captivity in Algiers, together with the story of the Algerian convert
Zoraida, one of the most splendid Cervantine creations. Cervantes’s
story memorializes historical events that both inaugurated and closed
his military career in the Mediterranean from 1571 to 1574.32 This
narrative, in fact, constitutes ‘the first modern novel on captivity’.33 As
such, it transforms captivity—and the quest for freedom—into a novella
of great beauty and complexity, which would inspire other writers after
Cervantes. Introduced by the ‘Discourse on Arms and Letters’ delivered
by Don Quixote at the inn in I.37–8, The Captive’s Tale dramatizes this
very discourse, as it illustrates the tribulations of the soldier, including
captivity in Algiers. Significantly, the sudden arrival at the inn of a man
recently released from captivity in Barbary and a mysterious veiled
woman named Zoraida interrupts Don Quixote’s discourse.
The Captive’s Tale begins with a folkloric introduction, in which an
old gentleman from the mountains of León divides his fortune among
his three sons. The first-born Ruy Pérez embraces the career of arms
and enlists in the army in 1567, following the Duke of Alba to Flanders.
Nevertheless, in 1571, the soldier leaves Flanders in order to
participate in the Mediterranean crusade ‘against the common enemy,
which is the Turk’.34 The second part of the story relates the career of
Captain Pérez de Viedma, who fought at Lepanto and was captured by
the famous Calabrese corsair Uludj Ali as he fled from the battle. After
toiling for years as a galley slave, Ruy Pérez ends up in Algiers as a
captive of Hasan Pasha, recalling some of the true-life experiences of
Cervantes.35 Most importantly, Ruy Pérez’s description of his
incarceration in the prison compound introduces the mention of
Cervantes’s own name: ‘Un soldado español llamado tal de Saavedra’
[‘A Spanish soldier called something de Saavedra’].36 Cervantes thus
emerges as a fantastic apparition in the mise en scène of his own
captivity. In fact, the internal dates of the story suggest that the present
telling of this tale takes place between 1589 and 1590. Given
Cervantes’s custom to indicate the date of composition in his fiction,
critics have supposed that Cervantes wrote The Captive’s Tale in 1589
and later included it in Don Quixote.37
The third section of The Captive’s Tale recounts the story of the
Moorish beauty Zoraida, her appearance at the window of the prison
courtyard, and her escape with the captives from Algiers, thanks to her
aid and the intervention of a Spanish renegade. This character evokes
the historical Morat Ra’is Maltrapillo, a renegade who saved
Cervantes’s life in Algiers. Significantly, Zoraida makes her entrance
into the story after the captive recalls the tortures that the ruler Hasan
Pasha perpetrated upon his slaves: ‘Every day he hanged someone,
impaled another, cut off the ear of another.’38 Her appearance, then,
closes a narrative passage haunted by the repetition of the ominous
phrase ‘había de ser empalado’ [he would be impaled]. The phrase not
only evokes the appalling death of the Moor who was impaled for
helping Cervantes in his third escape attempt, but also the former
captive’s terror at the prospect of being impaled himself. For this
reason, I have suggested that Zoraida is the miraculous apparition that
transforms this scene of death into a fantasy of escape.39
John J. Allen’s article focuses on the similarities and differences
between the captive’s account and Cervantes’s experiences as a soldier
and captive in Algiers. The captive recounts these historical events with
precision, praising the heroic defence of Tunis and La Goleta by its
soldiers during the 1574 Turkish attack to these forts, and denouncing
the Spanish state for abandoning them. His account is rigorously
historical, down to the trench warfare employed by the Turks and the
names of notable personages.40 Through this tale, then, Cervantes bears
witness to the deaths of these soldiers.
Cervantes’s 
story, 
then, 
offers 
a 
critical 
revision 
of 
the
Mediterranean conflicts that followed the Christian triumph at Lepanto.
Significantly, The Captive’s Tale highlights the role played by the
Spanish renegade who translates Zoraida’s letters and organizes the
fugitives’ escape, beginning a trend in Cervantes apropos the
sympathetic representation of these frontier-men who crossed political
and religious lines. Indeed, Cervantes is the writer who best describes
the 
phenomenon 
of 
the 
renegades 
in 
the 
sixteenth-century
Mediterranean. The affectionate expression nuestro renegado, repeated
seven times in The Captive’s Tale, incarnates a new geopolitical vision
that includes the renegade in the imagined communities of Cervantes’s
fictions. Along these lines, E. Michael Gerli has suggested that this tale
is ‘a plea for racial, cultural, and ideological tolerance’ in response to
the public debate on the Morisco question and their imminent
expulsion.41 Both the central role given to the renegade in the story,
and the fictional marriage of the Muslim convert Zoraida to an Old
Christian, constitute an appeal for cultural and religious tolerance at a
painfully divisive time in Spain.
Los baños de Argel
Probably composed around 1608–10 and published in 1615, Los baños
de Argel contains many of the same characters and plot elements as El
trato, including a secondary plot from The Captive’s Tale.42 The central
plot of Baños recounts the story of the captive Don Lope, ransomed by
the gold of Zahara, a Moorish beauty eager to convert to Christianity—
a variation of The Captive’s Tale.43 A thorough reading of Baños and
other plays by Cervantes would suggest that Muslims—regardless of
age, condition, or gender—are complex human beings, capable of
being, like Christians, either dignified persons or despicable
barbarians.44
As a refined re-elaboration of the experience of captivity, Baños
bears witness to the creative reworking of these memories. In this
drama, Cervantes deploys special theatrical effects intended to move
the audience. Baños opens with a nocturnal assault perpetrated by
Algerian corsairs on a coastal village of Spain, enabled by the Spanish
renegade Yuzuf, who knows the territory well. Infused with epic
grandeur, this scene stresses the confusion and desperation of the
women, children, and old people torn from their country.
The presence of city walls and cliffs in Baños, as well as the clear
stage directions, reveal Cervantes’s keen interest in theatrical effects.
Hence, the portrayal of life in the Algerian slave prisons becomes more
spectacular in this play, as disclosed by the stage directions: ‘A
Christian captive comes out running away from the guard, who comes
after him beating him up’.45 The captive is mortally ill, which elicits a
wry comment from another slave: ‘and when they see him dead, they
say: “By Allah! The poor man was, in effect, sick!”’. The apotheosis of
visual effects occurs with the martyrdom of Francisquito, a child
captive who refuses to abandon his Christian faith and dies on stage
from the tortures inflicted by his master.46 The accumulation of
sensational effects include the staging of exotic Algerian customs, such
as the lavish wedding celebrated between Hajji Murad’s daughter
Zahara and sultan ‘Abd al Malik of Morocco. These spectacular visual
effects function as an integral part of the play, designed to move the
spectators.47
Baños also includes an extraordinary scene of theatre within the
theatre, a dramatic recourse used in other plays by Cervantes, such as
Pedro de Urdemalas, and the interlude El retablo de las maravillas. In
effect, the most remarkable scene of Baños, in Act III, is the staging, in
the slave-houses of Algiers, of a pastoral play by Lope de Rueda,
interpreted by some improvised actors (captives) for an audience of
Spanish captives. The common condition of both spectators and actors
—all experiencing captivity—unifies the two actions of the play within
the play. Certainly, the buffooneries of the sacristan, which elicit the
angry reactions of Cauralí, a corsair captain, enhance the melodramatic
effects of the scene. Yet the tragic news of the death of various
captives, killed by janissaries who thought that a Spanish fleet had
arrived in Algiers, halt the pitiful comedy staged by prisoners.
Subversion of Stereotypes
Various critics have recently argued for the presence in this drama of a
greater tolerance of ethnic and religious others, including alternative
models of human interaction to that imposed by Counterreformation
ideology.48 As Márquez Villanueva suggests, the great lessons of
Cervantes’s Barbary plays do not reside in their autobiographical focus,
nor in their support of Habsburg ideology, but in their subversion of
stereotypes and illustration of the pacific cohabitation of diverse
peoples.49 Likewise, Albert Mas stressed the courteous interactions
between Muslims and Christian in Baños and other plays by
Cervantes.50 For instance, when Cauralí arrives at the scene of the
comedia played by captives, Don Fernando addresses him as fende, that
is, sir. The corsair, in turn, asks the captives to relax in his presence.
Indeed, the exchanges between Muslims and Christian captives are
always polite; in contrast, the senseless fanaticism and hatred against
Jews embodied by the captive sexton would represent a personification
of the most deplorable and un-Christian aspects of Spanish life, which
Cervantes censures in other works.51
Other scholars have focused on the play’s complexities and
contradictions, such as ‘the intriguing mix of Christian fervour and
humanist scepticism’ that characterizes Baños.52 While Francisquito,
who dies on stage, exemplifies the strongest version of Christian
identity in this drama, his father’s desire to see him expire as a martyr
rather than convert to Islam, and his refusal to let his child lie down to
die so that he will resemble Christ on the cross, introduce disturbing
notes in Cervantes’s drama. Significantly, the character most closely
connected to the Church is the sexton Tristán, mentioned earlier, who
tortures the Jews of Algiers. Described by a critic as ‘cowardly,
inconstant, self-centred, and greedy’, the sexton is also lax in his faith
and patriotism. The Jew, instead, is a firm believer who shows great
dignity in the face of injustices.53 Then again, as an image of a galán
[ladies’ man], the figure of Don Lope—a superficial character given to
gallantries and verbal excesses—would function as a parody of his
double Ruy Pérez in The Captive’s Tale.54 Meregalli thus suggested that
the pompous figure of Don Lope could be an allusion to Lope de Vega.
Yet Baños also exemplifies a Manichean view of Christian-Muslim
relations. These include the array of Christian renegades represented in
this drama, such as the disloyal Ysuf—surely a Morisco expelled from
Spain—who directs raids on his former homeland, along with the
repentant Hazén, who kills the traitor and later dies for his crime.
Throughout his work, Cervantes offers a complete typological
panorama of renegades, from the virulent defector, the indecisive
convert, the opportunistic turncoat, to the repentant apostate. Critics
have noted the author’s fascination with these ambiguous figures, who
lived in the in-between, partaking of various cultures at a time.55 In
Algiers, Cervantes confronted political and religious defection, which
included the thorny issues of shifting beliefs and identities. Evidently,
the limit situation of captivity, when life and liberty were at stake,
often turned captives into informers on their fellow prisoners or into
deceitful converts.56 Yet, in contrast with its dichotomous views of
Christian-Muslim relations, Baños offers accurate portrayals of the
religious freedom that Muslims allowed their Christian captives in
Algiers, such as the celebration of Mass and the performance of an
Easter play inside the prison.
In addition, the episodic plurality of the play—and the fact that it
has various protagonists and more than one climax—has perplexed
more than one reader. The diverse perspectives and multiple characters
crisscrossing the stage would refer, then, to a common predicament,
not to the threads of a unique plot, as in Lope.57 Along these lines,
Friedman has suggested that Cervantes achieves unity in his plays not
around ‘a single action but through parallel events (or episodes) which
form a conceptual unity’.58 It follows that unity in Baños would lie in its
subject matter rather than in its plot. Mauricio Doménici proposes, in
this sense, that the general subject of the play would be the struggle for
freedom or the liberation from oppression, a quest that defines the
actions of the key characters: Francisquito and Zahara.59 While the
child-captive embodies a heroic resistance to a forceful conversion to
Islam and being the sexual object of the Cadi, Zahara is a symbolic
captive since she is a secret Christian. Connected by the subject matter
of the play, they exemplify the struggle for freedom. Concerning
captivity, moreover, Cervantes’s theatrical reflections focus on the
diversity of human behaviour when faced with limit situations.
Traitors to the Faith and Fatherland
Along these lines, recall that theatre in Spain served as a medium for
ideological control of society.60 The State and Church not only officially
condemned apostasy, but also enforced a view of renegades as traitors
to the faith and fatherland, a view that spilled into the theatre. Yet
religious and cross-cultural defections were customary in the early
modern Mediterranean. Moreover, Christians who ‘turned Turk’ often
did not sever ties with their past in Christian Europe, including their
faith.61 The clandestine political openness of the Habsburg secret
services, which regularly reached out to Christian renegades across the
Mediterranean, radically contrasted with the Inquisition’s stand on
conversions to Islam. Spanish theatre, then, usually portrayed
renegades as double traitors, such as in Lope. In contrast, Cervantes
throughout his work does not generally represent renegades as
infamous figures, but rather as ambiguous yet dignified characters who
deserve understanding. The value of Baños, then, would lie in the
confrontation of the varied points of view that configure both the play
and the lives of captives and renegades in Algiers.
El gallardo español
This play dramatizes the terrible siege of Orán and Mers-el-Kebir
between April and June 1563 by Hasan Pasha, the son of Barbarossa
(c.1517–70).62 Cervantes’s drama also alludes to various historical
personages who valiantly defended these forts, such as Don Alonso de
Córdoba, II Count of Alcaudete, and his brother, Don Martín de
Córdoba, who succeeded him as military governor of Orán. We must
remember that, after his repatriation in 1581, Cervantes travelled to
Orán on a secret mission accomplished for Philip II.63 This North
African presidio (citadel) had become Spain’s new frontier in the
Crusade against Islam. El gallardo español portrays life in this citadel,
where soldiers suffered incredible hardships, since payments were
always late, and food was scarce. Defecting to Islam was common in
these presidios, also used as sites of deportation for Iberian aristocrats
punished for their crimes.64
Probably composed between 1597 and 1606, Cervantes’s play
depicts life at the presidio of Orán, defended by a meagre military
garrison. The author demonstrates his familiarity with the topography
of the site, down to the names of the forts—Almaxar, San Miguel, Mers-
el-Kebir—and surrounding cities and villages. Act III represents the
siege of Orán with much movement and spectacular staging. In spite of
the stage directions, which state that the dead must fall inside the
‘dressing room’, Cervantes offers a colourful description of war in the
North-African presidios, including a striking vision of the immense
armies that circled Orán by land and sea in 1563.65
Yet the frontier setting and intrigue of Cervantes’s play evoke the
chivalric adventures and Moorish ballads that close the first part of
Pérez de Hita’s Guerras civiles de Granada, with their strong idealism,
proud heroines, sentimental Moors, and heroic knights. The hero of
Cervantes’s play, Don Fernando de Saavedra, is also conspicuously
reminiscent in both name and exploits of the valiant captive Sayavedra
of the ‘Río-verde’ ballads that conclude Pérez de Hita’s novel.66
Saavedra, in fact, was the family name that exemplified the culture of
the frontier in fifteenth-century Spain. This patronymic was associated
with the defence of and forays across the border between Christian
Spain and the kingdom of Granada. In addition, Don Fernando de
Saavedra’s name in Cervantes’s play also recalls the autobiographical
characters of El trato de Argel and The Captive’s Tale, as well as
Cervantes’s own surname (Saavedra), adopted in 1586. That the hero of
Cervantes’s play is a frontier man who moves on the fringe permeable
to the culture of the antagonist is significant.
‘¿Que sea moro Don Fernando?’
Modelled upon the historic Don Fernando de Cárcamo, who
courageously defended the fortress of Mers-el-Kebir during the 1563
siege of Orán, Don Fernando de Saavedra is a frontiersman who
fluctuates between the Spanish presidio of Orán and the Bedouin
encampment where the beautiful Arlaxa lives. Like a typical frontier
captain, Don Fernando responds to the challenge of the noble Moor
Alimuzel and crosses over to the enemy camp, where he becomes a
voluntary captive and befriends his adversary. More than a ‘complex
intrigue of love and honour’, which recalls questions of fame and
immortality, Cervantes’s drama invokes misplaced ideas of ‘fame as
appearance’.67 The valiant, yet imprudent Christian hero who disobeys
his commander in order to respond to a challenge to duel from a
Muslim contender embodies these improper ideas.68 With a typical
Cervantine twist, the hero Don Fernando de Saavedra attracts the
interest of two women—the Moorish Arlaxa and the Christian
Margarita, both of whom have heard of his exploits. Arlaxa, in turn,
elicits the attention of two men—the Christian Don Fernando and the
Moor Alimuzel. Even so, in the midst of the Turkish-Algerian attack on
Orán, the Christian hero suddenly turns against the Berber armies
among which he is fighting dressed as a Moor, and heroically defends
the threatened Christian bastion. His ambiguous status as both a
disguised Muslim and a Christian hero is emphasized by a question
posed in Orán: ‘¿Que sea moro Don Fernando?’ [Is it possible that Don
Fernando is a Moor?], a question elusively answered: ‘Such is the news
spread by children through the city.’69
Most notable is the play’s emphasis on desertion to the enemy camp,
evoked by a soldier’s account of Don Fernando’s disappearance: ‘Either
he left to turn Turk or he acted badly in leaving the citadel’.70 In effect,
the fluctuating cultural borders of the Barbary States facilitated
contacts between the autochthonous populations and the Iberian
garrisons. Orthodoxy, however, has no place in El gallardo español,
which eliminates religious conviction in favour of a pacific Christian
co-existence with the Muslim factions. Cervantes’s play offers subtle yet
unequivocal reflections on the question of belonging to different
credos. Accordingly, Alimuzel declares to a Spaniard: ‘No es enemigo el
cristiano; / contrario sí’ [The Christian is not an enemy; a rival, yes]. In
the same vein, Don Fernando tells his Moorish ally that differing
religious precepts will not impede their friendship, to which Alimuzel
answers: ‘Que Mahoma te proteja y te de lo que pueda’ [I hope
Muhammad protects you and gives you what he can].71 Indeed, the
play’s portrayal of the fluid frontier-world of Orán offers a covert
consideration of the grave conflicts that divided early modern Spain.
Cervantes’s drama eludes any note of religious conflict, preferring
instead to focus on the exquisite courtesies exchanged between Muslims
and Christians of all ranks. In this context, it is impossible to forget the
farewell between a soldier from Orán and the Moor Alimuzel in
Cervantes’s play. The Spaniard bids the Moor farewell, by saying: ‘Tu
Mahoma, Alí, te guarde’ [May your Muhammad, Ali, protect you]. To
which the Moor replies: ‘Tu Cristo vaya contigo’ [May your Christ go
with you].72 No other writer of the period dared present such a
harmonious encounter between conflicting worlds. This may explain
why the playwright closes his play by stating that his aim was to mix
‘truths with fabulous intentions’.73
El amante liberal
Set in the Eastern Mediterranean, El amante liberal is, from a
geopolitical perspective, the most audacious of Cervantes’s Novelas
ejemplares. Its boldness derives in part from the novella’s precise
mapping of, and intense engagement with, the Eastern (Muslim)
Mediterranean. The narrative subverts the idea of a radically divided
internal sea split into two immutable cultures: East and West, Muslims
and Christians. Accordingly, this novella is a fundamental work in
relation to Cervantes’s vision of the Mediterranean world in the age of
Philip II.74 Unusually rich in maritime knowledge, this is a marine story
par excellence. For these reasons, Otmar Hegyi called El amante liberal
‘an epic of the Eastern Mediterranean’, which reflects ‘the atmosphere
of the Ottoman vital space’.75
Yet Cervantes’s narrative also delineates a precise cartography of the
Habsburg-Ottoman frontiers in the sixteenth-century Mediterranean
(Sicily, Malta, and Tunis). Although the story begins in Cyprus, it soon
moves through a narrative flashback to Trapani, Sicily, where Barbary
corsairs capture the protagonists Ricardo and his beloved Leonisa.
Storms, shipwrecks, and cruel deaths follow across turbulent sea
voyages that touch upon Palermo, Messina, Bizerte, and Tripoli in
North Africa, before arriving in Cyprus, where most of the action takes
place. In this way, El amante liberal fluctuates between two
geographical axes: Spanish Sicily, a frontier between the Ottoman
provinces of North Africa and the Habsburg domains of Western
Europe, and Cyprus, a crossroads of cultures, where Turks, Greeks,
Venetians, Jews, and renegades mingled with Christian slaves. The text
also oscillates between two intertwined themes: captivity and cultural
hybridity, in a play of concealment and disclosures that highlights the
complex crossings of Mediterranean frontier societies.76
Until the 1990s, however, criticism of Cervantes’s novella was
generally unfavourable. Critics considered this work merely as an
ingenuous creative exercise influenced by the Byzantine novel.77 Lately,
the story has received increasing scholarly attention. In his pioneering
study, Hegyi highlights the amazing ‘degree of realism’ achieved by the
narrative through the detailed ‘identification of nationality, religious
status, place of origin, and condition of the secondary characters’.78
William Clamurrro examines the geographical and historical details
that serve as background to the story, the subtle but important role
occupied by the renegade in the plot, and the hybrid identities of the
characters.79 For Carroll B. Johnson, the novella sabotages the official
version of the confrontation between Christians and Muslims, even
while establishing analogies between the structures and administrative
practices of Turks and Spaniards.80 In turn, Barbara Fuchs reads this
story as both a fluid and chaotic space, where, in spite of religious
divisions, the Habsburg and Ottoman Empires overlap in geographical
and conceptual areas.81 Camouflaged under an exotic Oriental scenario,
Cervantes’s text would also function as a scathing criticism of Spain’s
intolerant ideology. I have elsewhere emphasized the significant role
bestowed on the renegade Mahamut, a cultural broker who is the co-
protagonist of the novella. His close friendship and complicity with the
hero, Ricardo, stress the alliances between Christian captives and
renegades in Ottoman territories.82 Other critics have stressed the
accuracy of its historical and geographical frame, its rehabilitation of
the ‘renegade’, and its hidden satire of Spanish practices and
ideology.83
El amante begins in media res with a captive lamenting his fate
before the fallen ramparts of Nicosia, Cyprus, which suggests that this
is again a captivity story. Yet captivity soon loses its tragic accent as
the text redirects its attention to the renegade Mahamut, who
commands both the narrative exposition and the climax. As the cultural
broker who facilitates contacts between Christians and Muslims,
captives and renegades in Cyprus, Mahamut is both a Christian and a
Turk. His position as a frontiersman, who straddles various cultures,
speaks to complex cultural crossings in the Mediterranean.84
‘An Impression of Cosmopolitanism’
Still, Cervantine memories also haunt this story. Azorín highlights the
web of vital encounters that underlie this novella: ‘The man who writes
these pages holds in his eyes the vision of the Mediterranean, of the
Tyrrhenian Sea, the Adriatic, Nicosia, Cyprus, Corfu, Malta.’ In this
way, Cervantes would be the first Spanish writer ‘to offer an impression
of cosmopolitanism, of dense and modern civilizations’. Indeed, this
novella evokes the multiculturalism and commercial dynamism of the
Mediterranean cities ruled by the Ottoman Empire. The precise
portrayal of the attacks conducted by Barbary corsairs on Sicilian
territory, with their capture of human booty and ransom negotiations,
also speaks to the new commercial circuits created in the sixteenth
century through the exchange of men, women, and children, and the
traffic in ransoms.85
Certainly, the inaugural scene of El amante, with its focus on the
emotional collapse of the captive among the fallen ramparts of Nicosia,
suggests that captivity is the central subject of the narrative. At that
point, however, a ‘Turk’ named Mahamut—‘a very handsome and
dashing young man’—suddenly appears and engages in a lively
conversation with the captive.86 The narrator does not clarify who this
‘Turk’ is, or what he is doing in Nicosia. Recall that, in early modern
Europe, the term Turk signified at the same time an Ottoman subject, a
Muslim, or a renegade. Notably, it is Mahamut himself who alludes to
his conversion to Islam and his subsequent regrets for this action. The
reader also learns that the protagonists are Sicilians and childhood
friends.
These characters establish the temporal frame of the narrative.
While recalling the period before the Ottoman conquest of Cyprus,
Mahamut evokes that time (‘some two years ago’), when ‘this celebrated
and wealthy island’ was ‘basking in peace and tranquillity’. In turn,
Ricardo situates his abduction on ‘a particular day last May, which
today is one year three days and five hours ago’.87 His capture, then, took
place in May 1571, meaning the initial plot of El amante liberal occurs
between May 1571, when the corsairs capture Ricardo and Leonisa in
Trapani, and May 1572, when the protagonists encounter each other in
Cyprus. The meticulous construction of a historical frame for El amante
ties the story, however obliquely, to the seminal event of Lepanto. The
novella also features fierce storms of the Mediterranean that frequently
arise in winter and that affect both corsairs and prisoners.
One of the great innovations of El amante is its positive presentation
of a Sicilian renegade, who is a close friend of the protagonist.
Likewise, most of the secondary characters in the story are renegades.
Still, Mahamut is both the privileged interlocutor of the captive Ricardo
and the mediator who organizes the encounter between the Christian
lovers in Cyprus.88 More importantly, he is a passeur or crosser of
spatial, social, and religious boundaries. His role as a cultural broker
who facilitates interactions across linguistic, religious, and social
boundaries is essential for the dénouement of the story. This makes the
‘Turk’ Mahamut not only a confidant and accomplice of Ricardo, but
also a co-protagonist of the novella. His figure thus inverts early
modern European values that denigrated the Turks as enemies.
In contrast to other Spanish works of the period, then, El amante
stands out for the tolerance and genuine warmth with which Cervantes
portrays renegades, as well as for his praise of Islamic justice.
Accordingly, Mahamut’s conversion to Islam does not seem to alienate
his friend Ricardo, who appears to accept this as a common occurrence
in the Mediterranean borderlands. The fact that both characters are
Sicilians promotes their alliance as compatriots over and above the
dictates of religion. Cervantes’s fiction not only subverts the shared
Spanish State and Church’s injunctions against renegades or non-
Catholics, but also suggests that personal alliances with a region of
origin were stronger than political or religious identities. From a
geopolitical perspective, then, El amante liberal is one of Cervantes’s
most audacious fictions.
Clothes Make the Muslim
Similarly, the Christian name of the Sicilian renegade and the reasons
for his apostasy and appearance in Cyprus, dressed as a Turk, are part
of the ambiguities that characterize this novella. In fact, Mahamut’s
cryptic allusions to his conversion to Islam explain this happening as
the result of some mishap. He tells Leonisa: ‘I am a native of Palermo,
who as a result of various unforeseen events wears these clothes, which
I would not normally wear’.89 His statements also highlight the
implications of costume as part of a signifying system. The constant
references to his(despised) garments corroborate that, for Old
Christians and the Inquisition, donning the turban and wearing Turkish
clothes were an irrefutable proof of belonging to Islam.90
Significantly, after they sail for Constantinople, Mahamut and
Ricardo always appear together, juxtaposed or paired in the text. Both
their complementary character and their coupling would support the
claim that they are, in fact, doubles—the ‘Turk’ would be the alter ego
of the Christian Ricardo.91 Certainly, the novella disregards established
orthodox homecoming rituals, which included the reconciliation with
the Church and the recuperation of the subject’s baptismal name.
Instead, Mahamut retains his Arabic-Muslim name after he reverts to
his faith and marries Halima, disappearing into the crowds in Sicily.92
Such elusive ambiguities remain open in the story.
The Sicilians’ return to Trapani, disguised as Turks, inaugurates the
bizarre ending of the novella.93 In effect, before landing in Trapani,
Ricardo adorns the galliot with Turkish pennants of different colours.
The entry of a ‘Turkish’ vessel into the port of Trapani brings a
multitude of people to the marina. Next Ricardo asks Leonisa to
‘bejewel and dress herself in the same manner as when she entered the
tent of the pashas, because he wanted to play an amusing trick to her
parents’. Meanwhile, Ricardo and Mahamut also dress as Turks,
together with the rest of the Christian rowers. Then occurs the
theatrical disembarkment: as if in a procession, the disguised ‘Turks’
‘all stepped ashore and with tears and joy they kissed the ground many
times’. Their compatriots now understand that these ‘Turks’ are
Christians who probably captured the Turkish vessel. Finally, Leonisa
descends from the ship, her face covered with a veil of scarlet silk.
‘Ricardo and Mahamut escorted her, one on either side’.94
In his brilliant reading of the story, Díaz-Migoyo suggests that, more
than a genuine repatriation, Cervantes’s text offers ‘the representation
of a homecoming scene’ in which all the characters are actors. The
critic contrasts this theatrical return with the previous scene of
departure with which it forms a circular pattern. The second scene
reiterates in an inverted way the original scenario of the capture. The
‘trick’ that Ricardo prepares for Leonisa’s parents would be, then, a
‘simulacrum of deception’, yet one that does not trick anyone. The
performers appear before their compatriots ‘as actors who represent
themselves’.95 In turn, Georges Günter illuminates the play of
Cervantine ambiguity, which presents at the same time, both the
simulacrum of exemplarity and its deconstruction. The critic sees two
narrative voices in the novella—one passionate and anti-Turkish, and
the other reflexive and free of prejudices. Liberality occurs when
Ricardo gives back to Leonisa her role as a subject, which allows her to
choose him freely.96
In contrast, Luis Avilés performs an ethical re-evaluation of the
changes undergone by the main character through two divergent
activities: liberality and deception. His detailed examination of the
term liberality according to its meaning in early-modern Europe is
crucial for the story. Avilés differentiates the economy of captivity in
the Mediterranean, whereby corsairs assigned a value to a slave for the
purpose of ransom, from a ‘libidinal economy’, whereby a captive
became an object of desire and her value increased so much that a
monetary rescue proved impossible to achieve. The chaotic forces of
the libidinal economy of desire in the narrative led to a devaluation of
human life and the destruction of the Turkish political structures in
Nicosia. In the final scene, Ricardo ‘embraces the complexity and
diversity of human life’, one that includes a Turkish element. In sum,
his recognition of Leonisa’s freedom would constitute the ethical
gesture of liberality highlighted by Cervantes. What Avilés calls a
‘Mediterranean experience’ in El amante liberal is thus a complex
fictional representation of Ricardo’s ethical evolution.97
La española inglesa
Among the Novelas ejemplares, La española inglesa represents an intense
probing of the subject of captivity, where one capture remits to
another, in a fantastic outburst of invention that seems to have no
end.98 In fact, earlier critics suggested that this story was ‘another
autobiographical page by Cervantes’.99 The novella contains numerous
reminiscences of Cervantes’s captivity, such as the encounter of the
ship captained by the English Ricaredo with the corsair Arnaut Mami,
who captured Cervantes in 1575. In the second part of the story, the
protagonist recounts his seizure by Turkish-Algerian corsairs, his
imprisonment in Algiers, and his ransom by the Trinitarian Order, the
same order that rescued Cervantes.
Recent scholarship, however, has generally bypassed the subject of
captivity in Cervantes’s story in order to focus on its political and
historical resonances, particularly in relation to its opening, which
describes the 1596 sack of Cádiz by the English. In addition to
Cervantes’s critical engagement with his own historical moment,
various critics have addressed the plight of secret Catholics in England
in the period, and the information that the writer or his contemporaries
might have had about English Catholics and their dilemmas.100 In an
innovative 
study, 
Johnson 
analyzed 
La 
española’s 
meticulous
descriptions of international economic transactions, which confirm
Cervantes’s knowledge of complex business deals.101 For the critic,
Isabella and Ricaredo represent two different economic orders.
Isabella’s father, the Andalusian merchant, embodies a sophisticated
economic system based on credit, investment of capital, and processes
of exchange. In contrast, Clotaldo, the English Catholic, exemplifies a
primitive economic order, based on robbery and deceit.102 Cervantes,
then, would have supported the Spanish merchant class against the
English (and Spanish) aristocracy. For her part, Isabel Torres examines
‘notions of perspective and interpretation’ in La española inglesa that
‘unsettle the contemporary reader’s assumptions’. Her focus is the
conflictive narrative strategy of Cervantes and the active role it imposes
on the reader.103
In the following pages, I study the captivity motif in La española. Let
us recall that Cervantes’s story opens with the capture, by the English
Clotaldo, of a seven-year old Spanish girl, whom he seizes as a gift for
his wife during the sack of Cádiz by English forces. The theme of
captivity, then, inaugurates this novella. In addition, other adventures
that recall the memories of Algiers return to this story in circular
patterns. The English Catholic Ricaredo, sent on a privateering
expedition by Queen Elizabeth I, discovers three galleys with Turkish
flags in the Strait of Gibraltar and proceeds to attack them. The assault
carried out by the English ships, camouflaged under Spanish flags,
entices the Christian galley slaves on the Turkish ships to break off
their chains and fight for their freedom. This encounter with the
Turkish-Algerian fleet announces the reappearance of the phantoms of
Algiers in this novella. The Spaniards who come on board the English
ship recount that, while returning from Portuguese India, a terrible
storm descended upon their galley, which carried an enormous cargo of
pearls, diamonds, and spices. Driven to the area of Gibraltar by the
tempest, the half-wrecked ship was also unarmed, because at the height
of the storm the crew had thrown all the artillery overboard.104
Precisely at this moment, the Algerian corsair Arnaut Mami fell upon
the crippled Portuguese galleon, whose half-dead crew offered no
resistance to the corsair.
One of the Spaniards who comes on board declares that six days
after leaving Cádiz on a ship that was sailing for America, Barbary
corsairs seized his galley. Hence, he became a witness to the successive
assault of the Portuguese galleon by the same corsairs. His daughter
happens to be Isabela, Ricaredo’s beloved, the same girl captured by
Clotaldo during the sack of Cádiz in 1596. Since her apprehension by
Ricaredo’s father, Clotaldo, Isabela has been living in his London
household. Nonetheless, her ambiguous status as ‘riquísimo despojo’,
confirmed by the letter S embroidered in pearls on the lavish dress she
wears to visit the queen, verifies her standing as both a slave and an
adopted daughter. This S means ‘Sierva’ or slave, S being the letter with
which Spaniards branded slaves in the face.105 Constant allusions to
slavery and captivity, then, haunt this tale, while the recurrence of the
captivity motif creates a series of adventures.
The Phantoms of Algiers
The phantoms of Algiers reappear toward the end of La española, when
Isabela, who has returned to Spain with her parents, learns that
Ricaredo has been killed, news that impels her to enter the convent.
Among the crowd of onlookers gathered in Seville to admire the
beautiful novice on the day of her profession, a familiar Cervantine
image appears. Advancing through the crowds is ‘a man dressed in the
smock of a ransomed captive, with a badge of the Order of Trinity on
his breast, which they wear as a sign that they have been ransomed
by…the Fathers’.106 The former captive, now recognized as Ricaredo,
requests Isabela to stop, because she cannot be a nun while he is alive.
Cervantes thus makes his entrance into his story in the guise of the
freed captive Ricaredo. This move recalls the intrusion of the name
Saavedra in The Captive’s Tale, but in La española, instead of Cervantes’s
own name, the text presents a visual image of captivity in the guise of a
man clothed like an ex-captive returning from Barbary.
The story of Ricaredo’s capture, recounted later by himself, clearly
evokes that of Cervantes. After a pilgrimage to Rome, where Ricaredo
suffered an assassination attempt, he left Genoa on his way to Spain.
Algerian corsairs captured him around the Three Marías, a small port
near Marseille, and took him to Algiers. He remained there for a year,
after which the Trinitarian Order—the same order that ransomed
Cervantes in 1580—rescued him. La española, then, not only re-enacts
Cervantes’s return to Spain in November 1580, but also offers one of
the fullest accounts of his repatriation, including the procession made
by the former captives in Valencia as a sign of gratitude for their
release. The phantoms of Algiers thus appear condensed in a few lines.
But then again, they usher in other autobiographical reminiscences,
such as the images of the captive’s return to Spain, the participation of
the Trinitarian order in his ransom, and the danger of encountering
death in Algiers, or arriving in Constantinople as a slave, which would
have been fatal for Cervantes. As Ricaredo claims: ‘had I been sent to
the Sultan, I would have never been freed’.107
Both the inaugural and secondary captivity scenes in La española, as
well as the first dramatic procession in London, mirrored by the second
to the convent in Seville, illustrate the ‘dynamics of doubling’ in the
novella, confirmed by its oppositional rhythms and complex double
plots. As Torres suggests, if part two is ‘a utopian rewriting of part one’,
the creation of significance depends ‘on the reader’s active engagement
with the mirrored fictional worlds’ reflected in the story.108 These
fictional worlds include the images of Cervantes’s captivity, unfolding
into fantastic representations that open the window of creation. Indeed,
the sparse traumatic re-enactments of captivity scenes and concomitant
outbursts of creativity would suggest that this is a later story, written
after 1605.109
Certainly, La española seems to confirm the truth of its closing
remarks, in the sense that this fiction can teach us ‘how heaven can
draw out of our greatest adversities the greatest blessings for us’.110 As
the late Ruth El Saffar observed, this reflection seems to have a
meaning for both Ricaredo and Isabela in the novella, as well as for
Cervantes, since at the end, the characters inherit the author’s role and
narrate a story true to the life of Cervantes himself.111 This is the most
abstract formulation of the idea, developed in El casamiento engañoso
and El coloquio de los perros, that through writing, a person can
transform his or her disgraces into good fortune. Indeed, when
Cervantes states that ‘our greatest adversities’ are connected to ‘our
greatest blessings’, the latter include his fictions. The episodes explored
in this novella signal the point of décolage of creation in Cervantes, a
nodule that often originates in the nucleus of reminiscences related to
his capture and enslavement in Barbary.
La gran sultana
Probably composed around 1607–8 and published in 1615, Cervantes’s
play La gran sultana speaks to the European fascination with the
Ottoman Empire and its capital Constantinople, a cosmopolitan city
that still evoked memories of its past Byzantine splendour, in the midst
of its unmatched Oriental glamour. As in the case of La española inglesa,
the title of this Turkish drama ‘enacts an oxymoronic mixture’.112 In La
gran sultana, the playwright presents a series of vignettes from
sixteenth-century Constantinople, such as the procession led by the
Sultan to the Friday prayer (zalá) at the Imperial mosque of Hagia
Sophia, risky scenes with captive women in the palace harem, and a
lavish Persian embassy to the Great Turk. In his detailed study of La
gran sultana, Hegyi demonstrated the complexities of this work, ‘deeply
rooted in contemporary accounts of Ottoman history and life in
Constantinople’.113 Although Cervantes was never in Constantinople,
his Algerian captivity enhanced his curiosity about the vast multi-
cultural Ottoman Empire. Like other educated contemporary Spaniards
and Italians, moreover, he was interested in the Habsburg-Ottoman
clashes in the Mediterranean. In turn, the generalized Christian-
European fear of the Turk heightened these concerns.114 To be sure,
Cervantes read printed materials on the Ottoman Empire available in
Spain and Italy, as well as gazettes, avvisi, and newsletters accessible to
the curious.115 In fact, he took great care in reconstructing Turkish
customs and local colour in his play, with meticulous stage directions
that confirm his attention to spectacular exotic effects.
La gran sultana portrays the adventures of a Spanish girl, Catalina de
Oviedo, captured at the age of six by the famous corsair Morato Arráez
[Murad Ra’is], during her parent’s journey from Málaga to Orán, and
later deposited in Sultan Murad III’s harem. In time, the girl became an
extraordinary beauty. The primary plot of Cervantes’s play, then,
portrays the Sultan’s efforts to entice Catalina’s love despite their
religious and cultural differences, matters that greatly trouble the
young woman. Catalina eventually accepts the Sultan’s marriage offer
under the condition that she can keep her Christian religion, as well as
her Spanish name and dress. In Diana Wilson’s view, Cervantes allows
the couple to conceive a child in the play, ‘un otomano-español’ [a
Spanish-Ottoman], in a move that highlights the patterns of hybridity
that distinguish the author’s work.116 The Sultan’s desire ‘to mix
Ottoman blood with…[Catalina’s] Christian blood, to make it greater’,
certainly ‘problematizes rigid categories of religion, nation, and
ethnicity’—as George Mariscal noted.117 Cervantes’s attack on
ideologies of purity signifies a striking departure from contemporary
Spanish dogma and literary encounters with Islam.
There are two secondary subplots in La gran sultana. The first one
centres on Lamberto, a lover from Habsburg Bohemia who, dressed as a
woman, joins his beloved Clara in the harem, under the name of
Zelinda. The second focuses on a picaresque captive, Madrigal, an anti-
Semitic gracioso who refuses to escape from Constantinople because of
his liaison with a Muslim woman. As Fuchs and Ilika maintain, this
play was probably designed to appeal to European audiences by
‘voyeuristically exposing that most secret and forbidden of spaces, the
harem’.118 Both Baños and La gran sultana, moreover, among other
fictions by Cervantes, recurrently return to the allure of exogamous
unions between men and women of different faiths. For those expecting
a portrayal of Turkish excesses, however, the play represents a scenario
of monogamous love, which ‘condenses the human triumph of
Catalina’.119
Mas, Hegyi, and Wilson have examined the historical sources that
subtend the plot of Cervantes’s play, particularly the love story of
Sultan Amurates (Murad III) and his Spanish ‘Sultana’.120 The plot not
only recalls Sultan Suleyman’s love for and marriage to the Ukrainian
captive known in Europe as Roxelana (Turkish Hürrem), but also the
legend of the Venetian Nur Banu, principal consort of Selim II, who
probably made her his legal wife. Certainly, Cervantes’s change of the
Sultana’s nationality must have appealed to his Spanish audience—born
in Oviedo (Asturias), Catalina would have come from the cradle of the
Reconquista. The marriage of a Turk and a Christian woman, including
the Sultan’s professed respect toward the religious beliefs of his wife, to
the point that he allows her to keep her faith while she is the ‘Sultana’
of the Ottoman Empire, constitute the centre of most studies about this
play. In this respect, as Mascarell suggests, two interpretative positions
clash with each other. Either La gran sultana is a defence on the part of
Cervantes of religious tolerance and pacific coexistence among
radically different cultures; or the play is a mere work of entertainment
along the lines of a turquerie—a fiction on Turkish matters. The
ambiguity of Cervantes’s text precisely feeds arguments on both sides of
the debate.
‘A Splendid Absurdity’
Both the play’s fantastic storyline and its comic episodes, such as those
connected with the gracioso Madrigal and the lover Lamberto disguised
in woman’s clothes, have puzzled critics.121 While some scholars have
viewed Cervantes’s play as an ‘opera buffa’, others insist in its
representation of ‘a noble aspiration for peace and harmony in the
world’, a metaphor for tolerance among different peoples.122 Márquez
Villanueva summed up both positions with eloquence: ‘the play,
indeed, is a splendid absurdity’. Yet, this is not a farce in the style of
Lope, based on Hispanic clichés projected onto a banal Turkish
background. In its place, Cervantes would be attacking contemporary
Spanish ideology through an unexpected love story and a parallel
delirium that predicated a peaceful cohabitation between Turks and
Spaniards. Both subjects subverted the tenets of the Counterreformation
and the Spanish Inquisition.123 As mentioned earlier, although the
subject of the Moriscos does not appear in La gran sultana, it is surely
subjacent in the play given the imminent Expulsion that would begin in
1609. Márquez Villanueva concludes that, in La gran sultana, ‘instead of
preaching, Cervantes simultaneously plays, dreams, and harshly
criticizes’ the Spanish state. More importantly from the perspective of
this essay, the female captive in this comedia is not a pathetic creature
but rather a ‘focus of love and conciliation’.124
The study of Cervantes’s dramas, however, must inevitably pass
through a comparison with Lope, particularly because of the former’s
proximity and simultaneous distance from the Fénix’s creations. The
trickster Madrigal in La gran sultana speaks to this discussion. He is a
nominal captive, whose former life and identity are unknown. He is
also an antiheroic subject who seems to enjoy his captivity. Madrigal
was a town crier (pregonero), like Lazarillo de Tormes, which categorizes
him as a member of the picaresque world and a close associate of the
executioner. As Márquez Villanueva suggests, a reader of the period
would have suspected this character from the start, realizing that he is
a buffoon. Paradoxically, Madrigal states that, in due time, he will
obtain freedom by capturing three Turkish galleys with which he will
make a triumphal entry into Naples. Márquez Villanueva has some very
harsh words for this character, who abuses a defenceless Jew in an
outrageous way, even while ostentatiously flaunting his ‘Spanish
identity’.125
Nevertheless, Madrigal is also the ‘author’ of the incredible story of
the La gran sultana, one that he envisions recounting in Spain, ‘sin
discrepar de la verdad un punto’ [‘without straying one jot from the
truth’].126 This is an ambiguous assertion since we know that the
character is not only a liar but also a compulsive prankster. Díez
Fernández reminds us that ‘this ironic insistence in maintaining truth at
all costs also characterizes the narrators of Don Quixote’. As we know,
this leitmotiv traverses Cervantes’s masterpiece. The critic contends that,
since the composition of La gran sultana was close to that of Don
Quixote (1605), Cervantes probably transposed into his play the
mocking concern with truth present in his novel.127
While Madrigal clearly identifies himself as a buffoon, he
nevertheless functions as his own person, ‘someone who is very
conscious of his own actions’.128 In the final act, moreover, Madrigal
‘steps out’ of the play in the manner of Pedro de Urdemalas. His closing
ballad (romance)—where he claims that, upon returning to Madrid, he
will become a playwright—turns him into a theatrical impresario, as
well as a writer capable of creating literature inside the text. Madrigal
evokes an image of the writer and playwright Cervantes, not in a crude
biographical way but rather through the creation of ‘a burlesque
shadow of his own life, about which he himself would laugh’.129 Among
the captives of Cervantes’s last play, however, only Madrigal returns to
Spain, becoming a witness to captivity in Constantinople and a ‘creator’
of the oriental mirage that characterizes La gran sultana. The freed
captive has become a prisoner of fiction.
‘False Captives’ in Persiles
There are other ‘captives’ captured by fiction in Cervantes, such as the
‘false captives’ of his last novel, Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda.
Indeed, both the vivid memories of Cervantes’s capture, and the motif
of captivity itself, continually return to the author’s texts until the end
of his life. In effect, Cervantes’s literary production opens and closes
with the memory of his most painful experience. As with La historia del
cautivo and other Cervantine works, the episode of the false captives in
Persiles emphasizes the flirtation with, and simultaneous evasion from,
the re-enactment of captivity, in stylistic games that highlight the
mendacious texture of Persiles.
Certainly, the elusive ambiguity of Cervantes’s posthumous work
originates in the ‘game of masks, simulations, dissimulations, and
frauds’ that accompany the protagonists from the start to their final
adventures.130 Yet, the lies and dissimulations invented by Periandro,
to conceal his identity and protect his search for love, are diametrically
opposed to those of the false captives, among other shady figures in
Persiles, who belong to the picaresque world.
The story of the false captives in Persiles (III.10), begins with a
crowd of pilgrims meeting the storytellers, ‘in a town, neither very
small nor very large, whose name I don’t remember’, as the third-
person narrator claims.131 Cervantes’s formula par excellence—‘en un
lugar de La Mancha de cuyo nombre no quiero acordarme’ [in a village
of La Mancha, whose name I do not want to remember]—should alert
us to the import of this text. The phrase not only connects this episode
in Persiles with the opening words of Don Quixote, but also with other
Cervantine fictions, such as La historia del cautivo, where the axiom also
reappears.
In summary, dressed as recently released captives from Barbary, two
con artists narrate their terrible experiences to a crowd of gullible
peasants, in exchange for money. With great artistry, the storytellers
unfold a painted canvas on the town’s plaza as a support for their
narrative, while deploying other visual and acoustic effects, which
allows them to ensnare their naïve public. Two shrewd mayors,
however, expose the impostors and condemn them to flogging while
being paraded on donkeys through town. Finally, thanks to the brilliant
defence presented by one of the storytellers, the mayors pardon the
culprits.132 Moreover, the communal space, in which the narrator, the
pilgrims, and the rustic audience watch and respond to the
representation, favours an encounter reminiscent of Cervantes’s El
retablo de las maravillas.133 In truth, the figures of the old mayors evoke
the comic types found in Spanish interludes, who generally suffered
pranks at the hands of tricksters. Not fortuitously, we discover at the
end of the story that the mayors do not know how to read. Yet their old
age and rural provenance differentiate them from the picaresque
storytellers.
This episode opens with a curious excursus, which refers to the
relation between truth and lies, history and fiction.134 The narrator
immediately introduces the former captives, who wear the garments
used by those recently returned from Barbary. Displaying a large
canvas that depicts a striking map of Algiers and its marina, the
storytellers recite the tale of their captivity in the corsair city. Props
include two large chains and a whip, which one of the narrators cracks
from time to time. The act describes their life as galley slaves, including
horrific punishments meted out to the rowers during the fray of war.
Founded on the fascination elicited by powerful storytelling, the tale
of the false captives flows well, as the storyteller dupes his adversaries
with rapid verbose inventions. His feverish eloquence, claims Moner,
creates ‘a true rhetoric of orality’, which can transform into reality that
which is a mere illusion.135 In this way, the false captive peppers his act
with harsh Turkish insults, which evoke the terrible shouts that
horrified galley slaves in Barbary.
‘Una lición de las cosas de Argel’
At this point, one of the town’s mayors, a former captive for many
years in Algiers, recognizes the corsair vessel painted on the canvas, for
he had rowed in it as a galley slave. He decides to test the storytellers
to see whether they are ‘false captives’. Let us recall that both ‘false
beggars’ and ‘false captives’ constituted a plague in early modern Spain.
Their aim was to collect alms or donations to pay for fake ransoms.136
The mayor thus asks the storyteller for more details regarding their
ordeal in Algiers, eventually denouncing the ‘lies and inventions’ of
these false captives. Then, he exclaims “Yo he estado en Argel cinco
años esclavo’ [‘I was a slave in Algiers for five years’]. Unmasked by
the old man, the impostors confess they are not captives at all, but
students from Salamanca who want to see the world.137
Finally pardoned, the tricksters escape flogging for facetious reasons.
The kind-hearted first mayor who testified to his long captivity in
Algiers ends by inviting the young storyteller to his house, ‘where I’ll
give him a lesson on things about Algiers, so that from now on no one
will catch them making mistakes in their Latin, I mean, in their made-
up story’.138 The significant phrases uttered by the mayor of this
mythical place ‘whose name I don’t remember’, as well as his true
knowledge about Algiers and the mention of his five-year captivity
identify this old man with Cervantes. In this way, the author would be
reappearing in his own text both as a fountain of information on the
North African city and as a skilful narrator willing to transmit his
literary skills.
Let us note, however, the complexities of this text, which
simultaneously advances and retreats from the images of Algiers in an
intricate game of hide-and-seek enacted around the theme of captivity.
The fact that the false captives, who paradoxically relate a profoundly
true story, would have appeared in a town whose name the narrator
cannot remember sheds light on this passage, constructed from
traumatic shards and recollections. From the perspective of the
Algerian memories, moreover, this episode keeps slipping away amidst
the tangled web of truths, lies, and fiction woven by Cervantes.
Certainly, the references to Cervantes’s captivity re-emerge now in an
increasingly stealthy manner, reworked and camouflaged through his
literary production. Likewise, the motif of captivity joins the theme of
lies and truths in fiction, an abiding preoccupation of the writer. In
effect, the vertiginous amalgamation of facts and fiction displayed in
this story speaks to Cervantes’s magisterial ability to illustrate in a few
strokes the art of constructing a verisimilar plot. The tale of the false
captives, then, constitutes a skilful Cervantine demonstration of the
mingling of the historical and the invented according to the major
principles underlined by Persiles: the pleasure of variety, the travel
narrative as a medium of diversity, the complex mixture of history and
fiction, and the need for verisimilitude in fiction.139
Yet beyond the fundamental concepts concerning the verisimilar—
that is, beyond its masterly ‘untruths’—the episode of the pseudo-
captives reveals the persistence of disturbing memories that come to
index the belated effects of the past upon the narratives of Cervantes. It
also confirms the writer’s familiarization and convergence with his
Algerian recollections, which allow him to re-work and even play with
the motif of captivity in his fiction. Like Madrigal in La gran sultana, the
‘former captives’ with true stories to tell have been captured by fiction.
The humorous episode of the false captives in Persiles both retells the
story that the author had been recounting for over thirty years, since he
was ransomed in 1580, and closes Cervantes’s literary testimonies of
his Algerian captivity. Probably soon after he finished this chapter,
Cervantes would compose the prologue to his beloved Persiles, where
he enacts his last literary tour de force in his moving farewell to his
readers. As I have demonstrated in this essay, the continuous
elaboration of the effects of captivity in Cervantes begins with his
deliverance from slavery and concludes with the moment of his death
in 1616. In the end, the city of Algiers, ‘puerto universario de corsarios,
y amparo y refugio de ladrones’ [‘a universal haven for pirates and a
shelter and refuge for thieves’], remains the core, the texture, of
Cervantes’s work.
Works Cited
Allen, John J., ‘Autobiografía y ficción: el relato del Capitán Cautivo’ (Don
Quijote I, 39–41)’. Anales Cervantinos 15 (1976): pp. 149–55.
Anderson, Ellen M. ‘Playing at Moslem and Christian: The Construction of
Gender and the Representation of Faith in Cervantes’s Captivity Plays’.
Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 13, no. 2 (1993): pp. 37–
59.
Anonymous, Viaje de Turquía, edited by Fernando García Salinero (Madrid:
Cátedra, 2000).
Astrana Marín, Luis. Vida ejemplar y heroica de Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra. 7
vols (Madrid: Instituto Editorial Reus, 1949–52).
Avalle-Arce, Juan Bautista. ‘Introducción’ a Novelas ejemplares by Miguel de
Cervantes, 3 vols (Madrid: Castalia, 1985), II, pp. 9–37.
Avilés, Luis. ‘Expanding the Self in a Mediterranean Context: Liberality and
Deception in Cervantes’s El amante liberal’. In In and Of the Mediterranean:
Medieval and Early Modern Iberian Studies, edited by M. Hamilton and N.
Silleras-Fernández (Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press, 2015), pp. 233–57.
Azorín. Al margen de los clásicos (Madrid: Imprenta clásica española, 1915).
Bello, Miguel A. ‘Una lectura semántica de El amante liberal’. RN 24 (1983): pp.
132–6.
Bennassar, Bartolomé, and Lucile Bennassar. Les chrétiens d’Allah. L’histoire
extraordinaire des renégats. XVI et XVII siècles (Paris: Perrin, 1989).
Bicheno, Hugh. Crescent and Cross: The Battle of Lepanto 1571 (London: Phoenix,
2003).
Braudel, Fernand. The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of
Philip II, translated by Siân Reynolds, 2 vols (New York: Harper and Row,
1972).
Bunes Ibarra, Miguel Ángel de. La imagen de los musulmanes y del Norte de África
en la España de los siglos XVI y XVII. Los caracteres de una hostilidad (Madrid:
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, 1989).
Camamis, George. Estudios sobre el cautiverio en el Siglo de Oro (Madrid: Gredos,
1977).
Canavaggio, Jean. Cervantes, translated by J. R. Jones (New York: Norton,
1990).
Canavaggio, Jean. Cervantès dramaturge. Un théâtre à naître (Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France, 1977).
Canavaggio, Jean. Introduction to Los baños de Argel, Pedro de Urdemalas by
Miguel de Cervantes (Madrid: Taurus, 1992), pp. 9–43.
Canavaggio, Jean. ‘Lo cómico en el teatro cervantino: Tristán y Madrigal,
bufones in partibus’. NRFH 34, no. 2 (1985): pp. 538–47.
Canavaggio, Jean. Retornos a Cervantes. (New York: IDEA/IGAS, 2014).
Cardaillac, Louis, and Denise Cardaillac, Marie-Thérèse Carrière, Rosita
Subirats. ‘Para una nueva lectura de El Amante Liberal’. Criticón 10 (1980): pp.
13–29.
Casalduero, Joaquín. Sentido y forma del teatro de Cervantes (Madrid: Gredos,
1966).
Castillo, Moisés R. ‘Agi Morato’s Garden as an Heterotopian Place in Cervantes’s
Los baños de Argel’. In Spectacle and topophilia. Readings in Early Modern and
Post-Modern Hispanic Cultures, edited by Moisés R. Castillo and Bradley J.
Nelson (Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press, 2012), pp. 43–63.
Castillo, Moisés R. ‘¿Ortodoxia cervantina?: Un análisis de La gran sultana, Los
tratos de Argel y Los Baños de Argel’. Bulletin of the Comediantes 56, no. 2
(2004): pp. 219–40.
Castro, Américo. El pensamiento de Cervantes (Madrid: Imprenta de la Librería y
Casa Editorial Hernando, 1925).
Cazenave, Jean. ‘El gallardo español de Cervantes (1)’. Langues Néo-Latines 126
(1953): pp. 5–17.
Cazenave, Jean. ‘El gallardo español de Cervantes (2)’. Langues Néo-Latines 127
(1953): pp. 3–14.
Cervantes, Miguel de. Don Quijote, translated by Burton Raffel, edited by Diana
de Armas Wilson (New York: Norton, 1999).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Don Quijote de la Mancha, edited by Francisco Rico
(Madrid: Real Academia Española, 2004).
Cervantes, Miguel de. El gallardo español. In Obra completa de Miguel de
Cervantes, edited by Florencio Sevilla Arroyo and Antonio Rey Hazas, vol. 13
(Madrid: Alianza, 1997).
Cervantes, Miguel de. El trato de Argel. In Obra completa de Miguel de Cervantes,
edited by Florencio Sevilla Arroyo and Antonio Rey Hazas, vol. 2 (Madrid:
Alianza, 1996).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Exemplary Novels, translated and edited by B.W. Ife, 4
vols (Warminster: Aris and Philips, 1992).
Cervantes, Miguel de. ‘Información de Argel’. Información de Miguel de Cervantes
de lo que ha servido á S.M. y de lo que ha hecho estando captivo en Argel, y por la
certificación que aquí presenta del duque de Sesa se verá como cuando le
captivaron se le perdieron muchas informaciones, fees y recados que tenía de lo
que había servido á S.M. (Documentos), edited by Pedro Torres Lanzas (Madrid:
El Árbol, 1981).
Cervantes, Miguel de. La Galatea, edited by Francisco López Estrada and María
Teresa Lopez García-Berdoy (Madrid: Catédra, 1995).
Cervantes, Miguel de. La gran sultana. In Obra completa de Miguel de Cervantes,
edited by Florenecio Sevilla Arroyo and Antonio Rey Hazas, vol. 15 (Madrid:
Alianza, 1997).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Los baños de Argel. In Obra completa de Miguel de
Cervantes, edited by Florencio Sevilla Arroyo and Antonio Rey Hazas, vol. 14
(Madrid: Alianza, 1998).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda, edited by Carlos
Romero Muñoz (Madrid: Cátedra, 1997).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Novelas ejemplares, edited by Harry Sieber, 2 vols
(Madrid: Cátedra, 1988).
Cervantes, Miguel de. The Bagnios of Algiers and The Great Sultana: Two Plays of
Captivity, translated by Barbara Fuchs and Aaron Ilika (University of
Pennsylvania Press, 2012).
Cervantes, Miguel de. The Trials of Persiles and Sigismunda, translated by Celia
Richmond Weller and Clark A. Colahan (Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press, 1989).
Childers, William. ‘Don Quixote, Primera Parte, El ingenioso hidalgo don Quijote de
la Mancha’, ‘Don Quixote, Part One, The ingenious gentleman Don Quixote of La
Mancha’, ‘Don Quixote, Segunda Parte, El ingenioso caballero don Quijote de la
Mancha,’ ‘Don Quixote, Part Two, The ingenious knight Don Quixote of La
Mancha’. In Christian-Muslim Relations. A Bibliographical History 1600–1700,
Volume 9: Western and Southern Europe (1600–1700), edited by David Thomas
and John Chesworth et al (Leiden: Brill, 2017), pp. 223–5 and pp. 241–64.
Childers, William. ‘El trato de Argel, Los baños de Argel, El gallardo español, and
other captivity plays and writings’. In Christian-Muslim Relations. A
Bibliographical History 1600–1700, Volume 9: Western and Southern Europe
(1600–1700), edited by David Thomas and John Chesworth et al (Leiden:
Brill, 2017), pp. 196–218.
Clamurro, William. Beneath the Fiction: The Contrary Worlds of Cervantes’s
Novelas ejemplares (New York: Peter Lang, 1997).
Collins, Marsha S. ‘Transgression and Transfiguration in Cervantes’s La española
inglesa’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 16, no. 1 (1996):
pp. 54–73.
De Armas, Frederick A. ‘Los excesos de Venus y Marte en El gallardo español’.
Cervantes: su obra y su mundo, Actas sobre el I Congreso Internacional sobre
Cervantes, edited by Manuel Criado de Val (Madrid: Edi 6, 1978), pp. 249–59.
Díez-Fernández, J. Ignacio. ‘‘Sin discrepar de la verdad un punto’. La gran
sultana. ¿Un canto a la tolerancia?’. Lectura y signo 1 (2006): pp. 202–32.
Díaz-Migoyo, Gonzalo. ‘La ficción cordial de El amante liberal’. Nueva Revista de
Filología Hispánica 35, no. 1 (1987): pp. 129–50.
Doménici, Mauricio. ‘Lealtad e identidad en Los baños de Argel de Cervantes’. In
Cervantes creador y Cervantes recreado, edited by Emanuel Marigno, Carlos
Mata Induráin, y Hugo Hernán Ramírez (Pamplona: Universidad de Navarra,
2015, Biblioteca Áurea Digital BIADIG, 26), pp. 63–72.
El Saffar, Ruth. Novel to Romance: A Study of Cervantes’s Novelas Ejemplares
(Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1974).
Fernández, Enrique. ‘Los tratos de Argel: obra testimonial, denuncia política y
literatura terapéutica’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America
20, no. 1 (2000): 7–26.
Fernández Duro, Cesáreo. Cervantes, marino (Madrid: Estrada, 1869).
Forcione, Alban K. Cervantes, Aristotle and the Persiles (Princeton: Princeton UP,
1970).
Forcione, Alban K. Cervantes’s Christian Romance: A Study of Persiles y
Sigismunda (Princeton: Princeton UP, 1972).
Friedman, Edward H. The Unifying Concept: Approaches to the Structure of
Cervantes’s Comedias (South Carolina: Spanish Literature Publication
Company, 1981.)
Fuchs, Barbara. Mimesis and Empire: The New World, Islam, and European
Identities (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001).
Fuchs, Barbara. Passing for Spain. Cervantes and the Fictions of Identity (Urbana:
University of Illinois Press, 2003).
Fuchs, Barbara and Aaron J. Ilika. ‘Introduction’ to Miguel de Cervantes, The
Bagnios of Algiers and The Great Sultana: Two Plays of Captivity, edited and
translated by Fuchs and Ilika (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press,
2010), pp. ix–xxvii.
Galán, Diego. Relación del cautiverio y libertad de Diego Galán, natural de la villa
de Consuegra y vecino de la ciudad de Toledo, edited by Miguel Ángel de Bunes
and Matías Barcino (Toledo: Diputación Provincial de Toledo, 2013).
Galván, Fernando. ‘Católicos secretos en La española inglesa’. Anales Cervantinos
CLVI (2014): pp. 67–82.
Garcés, María Antonia. ‘“Alabado por sus acciones”: Maḥmud siciliano en El
amante liberal’. Special issue Cervantes y el Mediterráneo. Guest editors: Steven
Hutchinson and Antonio Cortijo. eHumanista/Cervantes 2 (2013): pp. 427–61.
Garcés, María Antonia. Cervantes en Argel: Historia de un cautivo. (Madrid:
Gredos, 2005).
Garcés, María Antonia. Cervantes in Algiers: A Captive’s Tale (Nashville:
Vanderbilt University Press, 2002, 2005).
Garcés, María Antonia. ‘Cervantes’s Veiled Woman’. In The New Norton Critical
Edition of Don Quijote, translated by Burton Raffel, edited by Diana de Armas
Wilson (New York: Norton, 1999), pp. 821–30.
Garcés, María Antonia. ‘“En las manos de Dios y en las del renegado”: Frontiers
and Frontier-Characters in Cervantes’s Mediterranean’. Special Issue Cervantes
and his Racial Other. Annals of Scholarship 19, no. 2. Guest Editor: Baltasar
Fra-Molinero (2009): pp. 79–121.
Garcés, María Antonia. ‘“Grande amigo mío’: Cervantes y los renegados’. In
U.S.A. Cervantes. 39 cervantistas en Estados Unidos, edited by Georgina Dopico-
Black and Francisco Layna Ranz (Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas-Ediciones Polifemo, 2009), pp. 533–80.
Garcés, María Antonia. ‘Los avatares de un nombre: Saavedra y Cervantes’.
Revista de Literatura 45, 130 (2003): pp. 351–74.
Garcés, María Antonia. ‘Staging Captivity: Cervantes’s Barbary Plays’. In
Approaches to Teaching the Spanish Comedia, edited by Margaret Greer and
Laura Bass (New York: MLA, 2006), pp. 166–73.
Garcés, María Antonia. ‘Zoraida’s Veil: The “Other” Scene of the Captive’s Tale’.
Revista de Estudios Hispánicos 23, no. 1 (1989): pp. 65–98.
García Cárcel, Ricardo. ‘La psicosis del turco en la España del Siglo de Oro’. In
Los imperios orientales en el teatro del Siglo de Oro. Actas de las XVI Jornadas de
teatro clásico, Almagro 1993, edited by Felipe Pedraza Jiménez and Rafael
González Cañal (Almagro: Universidad Castilla-La Mancha-Festival de
Almagro, 1994), pp. 15–28.
Gerli, E. Michael. Refiguring Authority: Reading and Writing, and Rewriting in
Cervantes (Lexington, KY: The UP of Kentucky, 1995.
Gil-Osle, Juan Pablo. ‘Escipión y la amistad en El amante liberal de Cervantes’.
LEJANA: Revista Crítica de Narrativa Breve 7 (2014): pp. 1–11.
Gómez Canseco, Luis. Introduction to La Gran Sultana by Miguel de Cervantes,
edited by Gómez Canseco (Madrid: Biblioteca Nueva, 2010), pp. 9–168.
González de Amezúa y Mayo, Agustín de. Cervantes, creador de la novela corta
española, 2 vols (Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas,
1956–8).
Goytisolo, Juan. Crónicas sarracinas (Barcelona: Ibérica, 1982).
Graf, Tobias P. The Sultan’s Renegades. Christian-European Converts to Islam and
the Making of the Ottoman Empire (New York: Oxford University Press, 2017).
Güntert, Georges. Cervantes. Novelar el mundo desintegrado (Barcelona: Puvill
Libros, 1993).
Hegyi, Ottmar. Cervantes and the Turks: Historical Reality Versus Literary Fiction in
La gran sultana and El amante liberal (Newark, DE: Juan de la Cuesta, 1992).
Hughes, Gethin. ‘El gallardo español: a Case of Misplaced Honor’. Cervantes:
Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 13, no. 1 (1993): pp. 65–75.
Irigoyen-García, Javier. ‘“La música ha sido hereje”: Pastoral Performance,
Moorishness, and Cultural Hybridity in Los Baños de Argel’. Bulletin of the
Comediantes 62, no. 2 (2010): pp. 45–62.
Irigoyen-García, Javier. ‘Moriscos conversos en Berbería: La heterotopia de Los
baños de Argel’. In Actas del Congreso El Siglo de Oro en el nuevo milenio, edited
by Carlos Mata Induráin and Miguel Zugasti, 2 vols (Pamplona: Ediciones
Universidad de Navarra, 2005), 1, pp. 911–17.
Johnson, Carroll B. Cervantes and the Material World (Chicago, Illinois:
University of Illinois Press, 2000).
Joly, Monique. ‘Dos notas al margen de El amante liberal y La española inglesa’.
In Hommage à Robert Jammes, edited by Francis Cerdan (Anejos de Criticón, 1)
(Toulouse: PUM, 1994), pp. 591–4.
Jurado Santos, Agapita. Tolerancia y ambigüedad en La gran sultana de Cervantes
(Kassel: Reichenberger, 1997).
Kanellos, Nicholas. ‘The Anti-Semitism of Cervantes’s Los baños de Argel and La
gran sultana: A Reappraisal’. Bulletin of the Comediantes 27, no. 1 (1975): pp.
48–52.
Kimmel, Seth. ‘Local Turks: Print Culture and Maurophilia in Early Modern
Spain’. Journal of Spanish Cultural Studies 13, no. 1 (2012): pp. 21–38.
López-Baralt, Luce. ‘El tal de Shaibedraa (Don Quijote I, 40)’. eHumanista/
Cervantes 2 (2013): pp. 407–26.
López Estrada, Francisco. ‘Vista de Oriente. La española en Constantinopla’.
Cervantes y el teatro. Cuadernos de teatro clásico 7 (1992): pp. 31–46.
Lucía Megías, José Manuel. La madurez de Cervantes. Una vida en la corte.
Retazos de una biografía en los Siglos de Oro, Parte II (Madrid: Edaf, 2016).
Mariscal, George. ‘La gran sultana and the Issue of Cervantes’s Modernity’.
Revista de Estudios Hispánicos 28, no. 2 (1994): pp. 185–211.
Márquez Villanueva, Francisco. Moros, moriscos y turcos en Cervantes. Ensayos
críticos. (Barcelona: Bellaterra, 2010).
Márquez Villanueva, Francisco. Personajes y temas del Quijote (Madrid: Taurus,
1975).
Mas, Albert. Les turcs dans la littérature espagnole du Siècle d’Or, 2 vols (Paris:
Centre de Recherches Hispaniques, 1967).
Mascarell, Purificació. ‘Espectacularidad y multiculturalismo. El estreno
mundial de La gran sultana por la Compañía Nacional de Teatro Clásico
(1992)’. eHumanista 29 (2015): pp. 606–22.
Mata Induráin, Carlos. ‘Los dos sonetos a la pérdida de La Goleta (Quijote I, 40)
en el contexto de La historia del Capitán cautivo’. Rilce 23, no. 1 (2007): pp.
169–83.
McCrory, Donald P. Introduction to The Captive’s Tale (La historia del cautivo)
Don Quixote, Part One, Chapters 39–41 (Warminster, Eng.: Aris and Philips,
1994), pp. 1–58.
Menéndez Pidal, Ramón. Estudios sobre el Romancero español (Madrid: Espasa-
Calpe, 1970)
Meregalli, Franco. ‘De Los tratos de Argel a Los baños de Argel’. Homenaje a
Casalduero, edited by Rizel Pincus and Gonzalo Sobejano (Madrid: Gredos,
1972), pp. 395–409.
Moner, Michel. Cervantes conteur: écrits et paroles (Madrid: Casa de Velázquez,
1989).
Moner, Michel. ‘Du conte merveilleux à la pseudo-autobiographie. Le récit du
‘Captif (Don Quichotte, I, 39–41)’. In Écrire sur soi en Espagne: Modèles et écarts:
Actes du XII colloque international d’Aix-en-Provence (4–5–6 Décembre 1986)
(Aix-en-Provence: Université de Provence, 1988), pp. 57–71.
Murillo, Luis Andrés. ‘El Ur-Quijote: Nueva hipótesis’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the
Cervantes Society of America 1, nos. 1–2 (1981): pp. 43–50.
Ohanna, Natalio. Cautiverio y convivencia en la edad de Cervantes (Alcalá de
Henares: Centro de Estudios Cervantinos, 2011).
Oliver Asín, Jaime. ‘La hija de Agi Morato’. Boletín de la Real Academia Española
27 (1947–8): pp. 245–339.
Pérez de Hita, Ginés. Guerras Civiles de Granada, edited by Shasta Bryant
(Newark, Delaware: Juan de la Cuesta, 1982).
Pérez de Hita, Ginés. Historia de los zegríes y abencerrajes (Primera parte de las
guerras civiles de Granada), edited by Pedro Correa (Granada: Universidad de
Granada, 1999).
Plagnard, Aude. ‘Cautivas cristianas y enamorados turcos: el tratamiento épico
de unos infortunios náuticos en la guerra de Chipre’. La poesía épica en el Siglo
de 
Oro. 
Criticón 
115 
(2012): 
pp. 
125–45. 
Digital 
ed.: 
http://
criticon.revues.org/125.
Resquejo Carrió, Marie-Blanche. ‘De cómo se guisa una fábula: el episodio de los
falsos cautivos en el Persiles (III, X)’. In Actas del V Congreso Internacional de
Cervantistas. Actas V-Actas Cervantistas, edited by Alicia Villar Lecumberri
(Madrid: Asociación de Cervantistas, 2004), pp. 861–77.
Rey Hazas, Antonio. ‘Cervantes se rescribe: teatro y las Novelas ejemplares’.
Criticón 76 (1999): pp. 119–64.
Rey Hazas, Antonio. ‘Las comedias de cautivos de Cervantes’. In Los imperios
orientales en el teatro del Siglo de Oro, Actas de las XVI Jornadas de Teatro
Clásico, Almagro, julio de 1993, edited Felipe B. Pedraza Jiménez and Rafael
González Cañal (Almagro: Universidad Castilla-La Mancha y Festival de
Almagro, 1994), pp. 29–56.
Ricapito, Joseph. Cervantes’s Novelas ejemplares: Between History and Creativity
(West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University Press, 1996.
Rivero Rodríguez, Manuel. La batalla de Lepanto. Cruzada, guerra santa e
identidad confesional (Madrid: Sílex, 2008).
Ruffinatto, Aldo. ‘Cautivos en cadena. Los cautivos de Cervantes entre vida y
creación’. In Actas del VI Congreso Internacional de la Asociación de
Cervantistas. Alcalá de Henares, 13 a 16 de diciembre de 2006, edited by Alexia
Dotas Bravo et al. (Alcalá: Centro de Estudios Cervantinos, 2008), pp. 657–
71.
Ruta, Maria Catarina. ‘La española inglesa: El desdoblamiento del héroe’. Anales
Cervantinos 25–6 (1987–8): pp. 371–82.
Sears, Theresa Ann. A Marriage of Convenience. Ideal and Ideology in the Novelas
ejemplares (New York: Peter Lang, 1993).
Sevilla Arroyo, Florencio and Antonio Rey Hazas. ‘El teatro de Cervantes:
Segunda época’. In Obra completa de Miguel de Cervantes, edited by Sevilla
Arroyo and Rey Hazas, vol. 14 (Madrid: Alianza, 1998), pp. i–xlix.
Sliwa, K. Documentos de Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra (Pamplona: EUNSA,
Ediciones Universidad de Navarra, 1999).
Sosa, Antonio de. An Early Modern Dialogues with Islam: Antonio de Sosa’s
Topography of Algiers (1612), edited by María Antonia Garcés and translated
by Diana de Armas Wilson (Notre Dame, IN: The University of Notre Dame
Press, 2011).
Sosa, Antonio de. Diálogo de los mártires de Argel, edited by Emilio Sola and José
M. Parreño (Madrid: Hiperión, 1990).
Stagg, Geoffrey. ‘The Composition and Revision of La española inglesa’. In Studies
in Honor of Bruce W. Wardropper, edited by Dian Fox et al. Homenajes No. 6
(Newark, DL: Juan de la Cuesta, 1989), pp. 308–21.
Torres, Isabel. ‘Now You See it, Now You…See it Again? The Dynamics of
Doubling in La española inglesa’. In A Companion to Cervantes’s Novelas
ejemplares, edited by Stephen Boyd (London: Tamesis, 2005), pp. 115–33.
Wardropper, Bruce W. ‘Comedias’. Suma Cervantina, edited by J.B. Avalle-Arce
and E. C. Riley (London: Tamesis, 1971), pp. 147–69.
Wilson, Diana de Armas. ‘‘A Spanish Ottoman’: Cervantes’s Play on Hybridity’.
In Perspectives on Early Modern Women in Iberia and the Americas: Studies in
Law, Society, Art and Literature in Honor of Anne J. Cruz, edited by Adrienne L.
Martín and María Cristina Quintero (New York: Escribana Books, 2015), pp.
549–59.
Wilson, Diana de Armas. Allegories of Love: Cervantes’s Persiles and Sigismunda
(Princeton: Princeton UP, 1991).
Zimic, Stanislav. El teatro de Cervantes (Madrid: Castalia, 1992).
Zimic, Stanislav. Los cuentos y las novelas del Quijote. (Pamplona: Universidad
de Navarra-Iberoamericana-Vervuert, 1998.
1 Cervantes, Don Quixote, II.58.
2 Cited by Astrana Marín II, pp. 334–5. All translations throughout this
essay are mine.
3 On Lepanto, see Braudel, vol. II, pp. 1027–105; Rivero Rodríguez and
Bicheno.
4 Cervantes, Prólogo, Novelas ejemplares, vol. I, p. 51; Exemplary Novels, vol.
I, p. 3.
5 See Mas, vol. I, pp. 537–47.
6 Garcés, Cervantes in Algiers.
7 Garcés, Cervantes in Algiers, pp. 31–2; Sosa, Topography of Algiers, pp. 125–
7.
8 Cervantes, El trato de Argel, I.396–9.
9 Cervantes, Información…, p. 50.
10 Sosa, Diálogo…, pp. 178–81.
11 See Canavaggio, Cervantes, pp. 87–96; Garcés, Cervantes in Algiers, pp. 45–
57; and Gracia, 51–79.
12 Cervantes, Don Quixote, I.39.
13 Castro, p. 386.
14 McCrory, p. 9.
15 Goytisolo, p. 60; Garcés, Cervantes in Algiers, p. 124.
16 Wardropper, p. 158.
17 Cervantes, Los trabajos…, p. 334; The Trials of Persiles…, p. 247.
18 Camamis, p. 53. For a notable bibliography on Cervantes’s captivity plays,
see Childers, ‘El trato…’, pp. 207–18.
19 Rey Hazas, ‘Las comedias…’, p. 34.
20 Sevilla Arroyo and Rey Hazas, p. xi.
21 Astrana Marín, vol. III, p. 32.
22 While ‘trato’ means ‘way of life’, the term also appears in the play as ‘trato
feo’ [ugly traffic] (1.15), thus alluding to the central activity of Algiers, the
commerce in human beings.
23 Rey Hazas, ‘Las comedias…’, p. 45.
24 Cervantes, El trato de Argel, IV.2142–55.
25 See Cervantes, El trato de Argel, IV. 2354–9.
26 Sevilla Arroyo and Rey Hazas, pp. xxix–xxx.
27 Castillo, ‘¿Ortodoxia cervantina?…’
28 Cervantes, El trato de Argel, I.523–30; Ohanna, pp. 120–2. On the play’s
therapeutic aspects, see Fernández.
29 For a discussion of these recurring scenes, see Garcés, Cervantes in Algiers,
pp. 235–41.
30 Cervantes, Galatea, pp. 484–5.
31 Cervantes, Galatea, pp. 489–97.
32 Garcés, Cervantes in Algiers, pp. 185–6. On autobiography, see Allen and
Moner ‘Du conte…’.
33 Camamis, pp. 53–7.
34 Cervantes, Don Quixote, I.39.
35 Allen, pp. 149–55.
36 Cervantes, Don Quixote, I.40; on the surname Saavedra, see Garcés,
Cervantes in Algiers, pp. 187–95, 198–201; and ‘Los avatares…’. On ‘Shaibedraa‘’
as a nickname in Algerian Arabic, see López-Baralt.
37 Allen, p. 151. Murillo proposes that Cervantes first redacted the story as
an autonomous tale and then turned it into Don Quixote.
38 Cervantes, Don Quixote, I.40. On the import of The Captive’s Tale and the
presence of Muslims in Don Quixote as an integral part of Iberia, see Childers,
‘Don Quixote’, pp. 232–3; see also his bibliography, pp. 241–64.
39 Garcés, Cervantes in Algiers, pp. 216–19; see also Garcés, ‘Zoraida’s Veil’
and ‘Cervantes’s Veiled Woman’.
40 Astrana Marín, vol. II, pp. 411–15; Oliver Asín; Garcés, Cervantes in Algiers,
pp. 220–8. Mata Induráin studies the sonnets for the fallen soldiers of La Goleta.
41 Gerli, pp. 42–3.
42 On the dating of Baños, see Canavaggio, Introduction, pp. 35–9. Rey Hazas
persuasively argues for a later composition of the play (1605) (‘Cervantes se
reescribe…’, p 124).
43 For a comparison of Baños and The Captive’s Tale, see Fuchs, Mimesis…, pp.
158–63; Márquez Villanueva, Personajes…, pp. 92–102, 115–34; and Ruffinatto.
44 Castillo, ‘¿Ortodoxia cervantina?…’, p. 233; Márquez Villanueva, Moros…,
p. 43.
45 Cervantes, Los baños de Argel, I.35.
46 Cervantes, Los baños de Argel I.297–302; III.254.
47 See Garcés, Cervantes in Algiers, pp. 209–10, and ‘Staging Captivity’.
48 Castillo, ‘Agi Morato’s Garden…’, p. 40. Among the critics who view a
greater tolerance in the play, see Anderson, Irigoyen-García (‘La música…’ and
‘Moriscos…’), and Zimic, Los cuentos….
49 Márquez Villanueva, Moros…, p. 44; see also Canavaggio, Cervantes, p. 74.
50 Mas, vol. I, pp. 322–9.
51 Castro, p. 91; Zimic, El teatro de Cervantes, p. 140–3. On the sexton as a
buffoon, see Canavaggio, ‘Lo cómico…’ and Retornos a Cervantes.
52 Fuchs and Ilika, p. xxiv.
53 Kanellos, pp. 49–50; Zimic, El teatro de Cervantes, p. 143–4. Casalduero,
Friedman, Meregalli, and Rey Hazas (‘Las comedias…’) believe that Cervantes
added these anti-Semitic scenes in order to please his audience.
54 Meregalli, pp. 667–8.
55 Canavaggio, Cervantes, p. 89; Garcés, Cervantes in Algiers, p. 57–9; and
‘Grande amigo…’.
56 Bunes Ibarra, p. 149.
57 Canavaggio, Retornos a Cervantes, p. 108–9.
58 Friedman, p. 21.
59 Doménici, pp. 63–70. I follow Doménici’s reading in this paragraph.
60 Lucía Megías, p. 180.
61 On renegades, see Graf; on Cervantes and renegades, see Garcés, ‘Grande
amigo mío…’.
62 On the siege of Orán, see Braudel, vol. II, pp. 995–9.
63 Astrana Marín, vol. III, pp. 143–53; and Sliwa, p. 369.
64 Braudel, vol. II, pp. 861–2. On the Spanish presidios, see Bunes Ibarra, pp.
257–74; Garcés, Cervantes in Algiers, pp. 224–5.
65 Mas, vol. I, 338–9; Cazenave, I, p. 16.
66 Pérez de Hita, Guerras civiles…, pp. 308–11, and Menéndez Pidal’ (pp.
155–63).
67 Friedman, p. 29. De Armas studies the relationship between Venus and
Mars in the play.
68 Hughes, pp. 65–75.
69 Cervantes, El gallardo español, II.1280–3.
70 Cervantes, El gallardo español, I.1065–7.
71 Cervantes, El gallardo español, I.1035–6; I.1045–52.
72 Cervantes, El gallardo español, I.475–6.
73 Cervantes, El gallardo español, III.3133–4.
74 Garcés, ‘Alabado por sus acciones…’, p. 427–8.
75 Hegyi, p. 226. On the novella as a maritime story, see Fernández Duro, p.
29.
76 Garcés, ‘Alabado por sus acciones…’, p. 435.
77 On the influence of the Byzantine novel, see Avalle-Arce’s ‘Introduction’ to
the Novelas ejemplares, p. 30. Plagnard studies the influence in El amante liberal
of Spanish and Italian epic works on the War of Cyprus.
78 Hegyi, p. 230.
79 Clamurro, pp. 41–69.
80 Johnson, pp. 117–20.
81 Fuchs, Passing…, p. 79.
82 Garcés, ‘Alabado por sus acciones…’, pp. 439, 445–9.
83 Cardaillac et al., pp. 21–2, 27–9; Clamurro, p. 47.
84 Clamurro, pp. 50–2; Garcés, ‘Alabado por sus acciones…’, p. 438.
85 Azorín, p. 110; Braudel, vol. II, 883–7; Johnson, pp. 143–6.
86 Cervantes, The Generous Lover, p. 111.
87 Cervantes, The Generous Lover, p. 111 and 117; my italics.
88 On friendship between the characters and its connections with the
mythography of the Scipios, see Gil-Osle.
89 Cervantes, The Generous Lover, p. 137.
90 Johnson, pp. 146–7; Garcés, ‘Alabado por sus acciones…’, pp. 443–4.
91 Garcés, ‘Alabado por sus acciones…’, p. 445–6; Clamurro, p. 54.
92 Fuchs discusses Mahamut’s improbable return to Christianity, Passing…, p.
68. On the significance of the Arabic name Maḥmud (Mahamut) given by
Cervantes to his character, see Garcés, ‘Alabado…’, pp. 445–7.
93 On the ‘pleasures of passing’ in the story, see Fuchs, Passing…, pp. 63–75.
94 Cervantes, The Generous Lover, pp. 164–5.
95 Díaz-Migoyo, pp. 131–45. For similar ‘tricks’ and festivities in Spain and
Italy involving fake attacks between disguised Moors and Christians, see Garcés,
‘Alabado por sus acciones…’, pp. 451–3.
96 Güntert, La española…, pp. 131–42; see also his review of scholarship on
the novel, pp. 126–42. Among other critics, Johnson and Sears argue instead
that Leonisa cannot choose freely, because Ricardo manipulates her through his
discourse to force her to accept his marriage proposal.
97 Avilés, p. 233–57. Bello highlights the refined narrative values of the story
(pp. 132–6).
98 Garcés, Cervantes in Algiers, pp. 243–5; I follow here my discussion of the
story.
99 González de Amezua, vol. II, p. 135.
100 Stagg proves that Cervantes shows an accurate and detailed knowledge of
Elizabethan England (pp. 308–30). On secret Catholics in England, see Galván.
Ricapito views the plight of English Catholics as an allusion to the Jews and
conversos in Spain.
101 Lucía Mejías addresses the business deals of Cervantes in Seville.
102 Güntert studies two discourses that clash in the novella: the feudal-
aristocratic and the capitalist-bourgeois, incarnated in the lovers, pp. 150–1.
103 Torres, pp. 132. Collins appeals to reader-response theories in her study.
104 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, vol. I, pp. 253–4; Exemplary Novels, vol. II,
p. 19.
105 Joly, p. 594.
106 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, vol. I, p. 277; Exemplary Novels, vol. II, p.
49.
107 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, vol. I, p. 282; Exemplary Novels, vol. II, p.
55.
108 Torres, pp. 115, 129. On the splitting of the hero, see Ruta.
109 Garcés, Cervantes in Algiers, pp. 244–5. On the dating of the story, see
Torres, p. 117.
110 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, vol. I, p. 283; Exemplary Novels, vol. II, p.
56.
111 El Saffar, p. 161.
112 Fuchs and Ilika, p. xxv.
113 Hegyi, p. 3.
114 See García Cárcel and Ricci. For Spanish print culture on the Turks, see
Kimmel.
115 Possible Cervantine contemporary sources on the Turks are Vicente Rocca
(1556) and Sansovino (1560). See Canavaggio, Cervantès dramaturge, pp. 62–3
and Hegyi, pp. 1–42.
116 Wilson, ‘A Spanish Ottoman…’, p. 545.
117 Cervantes, The Great Sultana, Act II, p. 29. Mariscal, p. 201.
118 Fuchs and Ilika, p. xix.
119 Márquez Villanueva, Moros…, p. 192.
120 Mas, vol. I, pp. 346–8; Hegyi, pp. 51–3; Wilson, ‘A Spanish Ottoman…’,
pp. 545–6.
121 For a detailed coverage of prior criticism, see Hegyi, pp. 1–8.
122 Zimic, El teatro…, p. 184.
123 Jurado Santos, p. 6; Márquez Villanueva, Moros…, p. 193.
124 Márquez Villanueva, Moros…, pp. 193 and 196. The critic argues that
Cervantes read Pedro de Valencia’s unpublished Tratado a favor de los moriscos
de España (1608) (Moros…, pp. 206–7).
125 Márquez Villanueva, Moros…, 209–10.
126 Cervantes, La gran sultana, II.2904–35; Great Sultana, p. 168.
127 Díez Fernandez, p. 318–20.
128 Gómez Canseco, p. 97.
129 López Estrada, p. 44.
130 Resquejo Carrió, p. 865. Her reading informs my discussion in the next
paragraphs.
131 Cervantes, Los trabajos…, p. 343; The Trials of…, p. 247.
132 Moner has traced the antecedents of this story to Apuleius’ Golden Ass of,
where a character evokes the pictorial depiction of his adventures (Cervantes
conteur, p. 124). Forcione connects the episode to the adventure of Maese Pedro
in Don Quixote (Cervantes, Aristotle…, pp. 276–7).
133 Resquejo Carrio, p. 863–4.
134 Cervantes, Los trabajos…, p. 343; The Trials of…, p. 246.
135 Resquejo Carrio, p. 866; Moner, Cervantes conteur, p. 291 and fol.
136 Viaje de Turquía describes these practices; on these issues, see also Pérez de
Herrera and Galán.
137 Cervantes, Los trabajos…, p. 347; The Trials of…, p. 249.
138 Cervantes, Los trabajos…, p. 350; The Trials of…, p. 251.
139 See Forcione, Cervantes, Aristotle…, pp. 276–7 and Cervantes’s Christian
Romance, pp. 136–7. On the Persiles s see Wilson’s study, Allegories of Love…
Section 2
Don Quixote De La
Mancha
Chapter 5
Don Quixote, Part I (1605)
Edwin Williamson
University of Oxford
Great claims have been made for Cervantes’s masterpiece. Georg
Lukács called it, ‘the first great novel of world literature’.1 Lionel
Trilling believed it was seminal in the development of prose fiction: ‘In
any genre, it may happen that the first great example contains the
whole potentiality of the genre…It can be said that all prose fiction is a
variation on the theme of Don Quixote.’2 According to Harold Bloom,
the book has left a lasting imprint on the modern novel:
This book contains within itself all the novels that have followed in its
sublime wake. Like Shakespeare, Cervantes is inescapable for all writers
who have come after him. Dickens and Flaubert, Joyce and Proust
reflect the narrative procedures of Cervantes, and their glories of
characterisation mingle strains of Shakespeare and Cervantes.3
Don Quixote remains a source of inspiration for writers in our own day.
In a poll of one hundred leading writers from fifty-four countries
conducted in 2002 by the Norwegian Nobel Institute, a majority voted
it ‘the greatest work of fiction ever written’.4
Such judgements may be open to dispute, but no-one can deny the
towering prominence of Don Quixote in literary history. In the
seventeenth century it inspired parodies of sentimental and pastoral
romances in France and England, and already in the following century
it was revered as a classic by English men of letters and would become
a seminal influence on the rise of the novel in England in the hands of
Fielding, Sterne, Smollett, and Defoe. The German Romantics found a
philosophical significance in the book that invested it with an
underlying seriousness. In the nineteenth century it was regarded as the
supreme precursor of European Realism, hugely admired for its
interplay of truth and illusion, its vivid characterization, witty
dialogue, and its knowing yet humane irony. Modernists and
postmodernists in the following century were drawn to its self-
reflexiveness and its ingenious metafictional games. The book,
moreover, would inspire artists in a wide range of other media, from
drama, ballet, and opera to painting, film, television, cartoons, and
comic strips. All of this begs the question: how could this one book
have exerted such vast influence on literature and the arts for some 400
years? And it prompts a related question: how could a man living in the
heyday of the Spanish Inquisition come to write a work that is widely
regarded as the first modern novel? I will argue that the source of the
book’s literary power—and the key to its modernity—can be found in
the unique and special madness of Don Quixote.
The dominant mode of fiction during Cervantes’s lifetime was what
we now call in English the ‘romance’. Several types were in vogue, such
as the novela sentimental based on courtly love, pastoral romances
portraying shepherds and shepherdesses debating their amorous
predicaments, and ‘Byzantine’ and ‘Moorish’ romances, which
alternated the trials of love with exciting adventure stories set in exotic
places. The most popular type in Spain, however, was the romance of
chivalry, which is perhaps not surprising given that Spaniards were
engaged in war and adventure across the globe. The origins of the
genre lay in the work of the twelfth-century French poet Chrétien de
Troyes, who combined Celtic myths about King Arthur with the ideas of
courtly love, which reached the courts of northern France from
Provence.5 Chrétien’s verse romances relate the adventures of a knight
seeking to achieve courtoisie, a balance of martial prowess and the love
of a beautiful and virtuous lady. The hero undergoes a succession of
trials (or ‘adventures’) put in his way by various enemies, including
enchanters, giants, monsters, and other evil beings; by overcoming
these, the knight will demonstrate his valour and virtue, and earn the
glory that will make him worthy of the love of his lady, whose hand he
will finally win as a sign of God’s favour. The linchpin of the system is
Divine Providence, for the author plays the role of God within his
fiction, freely managing events by means of coincidences, revelations,
discoveries, and reversals, so as to bring about the eventual triumph of
the hero, thereby demonstrating how, in the last instance, the world
may be saved from the powers of evil.
The genre of chivalric romance would undergo many subsequent
developments, but the basic quest-structure invented by Chrétien de
Troyes, as well as its courtly values and highly codified martial and
amatory conventions, survived in the sixteenth-century Spanish books
of chivalry known as libros de caballerías, whose prototype was Amadís
de Gaula [Amadis of Gaul] (1508) in the version of Garci Rodríguez de
Montalvo, a romance which became extremely popular in Spain and
famous throughout Europe.6 The success of Amadís de Gaula spawned
an enormous number of sequels and imitations in the course of the
century, feeding a voracious public appetite for the entrancing blend of
exciting adventures in faraway lands, love-affairs in aristocratic circles,
courtly 
manners, 
and 
increasingly, 
mind-boggling 
supernatural
fantasies. One finds magic and marvels in Chrétien’s romances too, of
course, but they are used judiciously and with poetic delicacy to
represent the correspondence of earthly experience with spiritual
realities. The extravagant fantasies of the libros de caballerías, on the
other hand, called into question their strident claims to be ‘true
histories’. A number of devices to disguise or mitigate the contradiction
between fantasy and history became standard in the Spanish romances:
their authors pretended to be editing manuscripts found in some
remote place; these had been allegedly written in a foreign tongue and
translated into Spanish; and, to cap it all, the often incredible
adventures were said to have been recorded by a chronicler who was
often attributed magical powers, no doubt to explain how he had
managed to witness the hero’s exploits, however far-flung or
implausible these might have been.
The libros de caballerías were condemned as profane and risqué by
clerics, and were controversial among men of culture, some despising
them as frivolous and absurd, while others, most likely Cervantes
among them, saw some merit in them so long as they could be put on a
sounder aesthetic footing. It was the basic contradiction between
history and fantasy that became the main target of Cervantes’s parody
of the genre. Cervantes was certainly not the first writer to parody
chivalric romance: the Italian, Ludovico Ariosto, for one, had already
done so in Orlando Furioso (1516–32), a book Cervantes greatly
admired and would allude to repeatedly in his own work. What made
the critical difference was the Spaniard’s brilliant idea of making his
hero mad: Don Quixote has lost his wits because he believes the claim
that the libros de caballerías are ‘true histories’. Thus, at a stroke, the
ideal world of courtly chivalry, which had so captivated the European
imagination for some four centuries, was condensed into a reality
existing nowhere other than inside the head of a lunatic. The ensuing
conflict between illusion and reality would form the basis of the kind of
fiction that developed in Europe in subsequent centuries.
There have been attempts to show that Don Quixote’s madness is
broadly consistent with contemporary theories of mental aberration
predicated on the balance of ‘humours’, and that the old hidalgo’s
physical attributes would appear to correspond to a ‘choleric’
temperament, but this hardly gets us very far in understanding the
book as a literary phenomenon, given that the knight’s madness has no
psychological interest in itself since it is just a pretext to launch a
parody of a popular literary genre. The available evidence suggests that
the general public of Cervantes’s time regarded Don Quixote as little
more than a funny book, which mocked the absurdities of the books of
chivalry.7 In eighteenth-century England, however, the madness started
to be given a positive gloss: the crazy knight came to be seen as a
benevolent innocent whose naiveté served to show up the vices and
corruption of society at large.8 A pivotal moment in this increasingly
positive interpretation of the quixotic madness came in the early
decades of the nineteenth century when the German Romantics
subsumed the burlesque character of the book in a sort of philosophical
allegory of the conflict between the Ideal and the Real—symbolized
respectively by Don Quixote and his squire Sancho Panza—in which
the knight’s love for his imaginary lady Dulcinea was imbued with
pathos and even a certain tragic irony.9
The tendency to regard the madness as a moral critique of society or
as symbolizing an admirable ideal led to the characterization of Don
Quixote as a man who is dissatisfied with his actual circumstances and
strives to refashion himself and the world. This type of voluntaristic
and idealizing interpretation was adopted, for instance, by several
important Hispanic writers in the aftermath of the crisis of confidence
that afflicted Spain after the loss of her remaining colonies following
her defeat in 1898 by the USA, when the knight of La Mancha tended
to be interpreted as the embodiment of the defiant Hispanic spirit
struggling against the supposedly barbaric materialism of the modern
world. The most famous instance was Miguel de Unamuno’s speculative
commentary Vida de Don Quijote y Sancho [The Life of Don Quixote and
Sancho], in which the knight was hailed as a Christ-like figure whose
madness consisted in the championing of ‘irrational’ faith against the
scientific rationalism and objectivity presumed to be the hallmarks of
the modern mind. An influential variant of this interpretation was
Américo Castro’s portrayal of the mad knight as a kind of outsider,
who, in the teeth of an oppressive and corrupt society, strives to assert
his authentic self through sheer willpower.10 However, in so far as they
imply that the quixotic madness is a form of play-acting which could be
modified according to circumstances, such views are hard to reconcile
with the actual text.11 Nevertheless, the idealization of the madness
became so entrenched that readers, critics, and scholars largely lost
sight of the comic qualities of the book.
Erich Auerbach was one of the first critics in the twentieth century
to reject this type of idealizing interpretation. In his famous book
Mimesis: The Representation of Reality in Western Literature, he observed
that:
There is…very little of problem and tragedy in Cervantes’s book—and
yet it belongs among the literary masterpieces of an epoch during
which the modern problematic and tragic conception of things arose in
the European mind. Don Quijote’s madness reveals nothing of the sort.
The whole book is a comedy in which well-founded reality holds
madness up to ridicule.12
Nevertheless, he pointed out that ‘since the Romantic period’ there
were ‘probably few lovers of literature who do not associate the
concept of ideal greatness with Don Quijote’, a conception which, in his
view, ‘withstands all attempts on the part of philological criticism to
show that Cervantes’s intention was not to produce such an
impression’.13 Auerbach was followed by a number of scholars, known
as the ‘hard’ critics, who believed that the function of the parody was
to castigate Don Quixote for what they tended to regard as his ‘folly’.14
Auerbach himself, however, recognized that the madness consisted in ‘a
combination of the noble, immaculate, and redeeming, with absolute
nonsense’, a combination which made it ‘much more difficult to
determine the position…of the novel as a whole on the scale of levels
between tragic and comic’.15 The nub of the problem is that Alonso
Quijano, an aging country gentleman from the provincial backwater of
La Mancha, strives to become a knight errant because he wants to make
the world a better place; so does the inherent absurdity of the quixotic
madness nullify its inherent idealism?
The ‘hard’ critics based their interpretations on what they presumed
were Cervantes’s exclusively burlesque intentions, but they disregarded
another vital element in the making of Don Quixote—Cervantes’s
invención, a quality of which he boasted in his Viaje del Parnaso: ‘yo soy
aquel que en la invención excede/a muchos’ [‘I am one who surpasses
many others in his powers of invention’].16 Don Quixote is without
question a funny book from first to last, since it was conceived as a
parody; but it is also the story of how Cervantes discovered the
potentialities of the knight’s madness in the process of writing, and
these discoveries must surely be taken into account when assessing his
overall literary intención.17 The fundamental critical challenge lies, I
would say, in accounting for the comic and the tragic elements of the
narrative without traducing Cervantes’s likely intentions as they might
have evolved in the making of Don Quixote.
There is a feature of the quixotic madness whose significance has
been generally overlooked: so long as the old hidalgo of La Mancha
believes that the libros de caballerías tell the absolute truth he will be
mad, but the text itself clearly indicates that there is a further level to
his madness:
En efeto, rematado ya su juicio, vino a dar en el más estraño
pensamiento que jamás dio loco en el mundo, y fue que le pareció
convenible y necesario, así para el aumento de su honra como para el
servicio de la república, hacerse caballero andante y irse por todo el
mundo con sus armas y caballo a buscar las aventuras y a ejercitarse en
todo aquello que el había leído que los caballeros andantes se
ejercitaban.18
[By now quite insane, he conceived the strangest notion that ever took
shape in a madman’s head, considering it desirable and necessary, both
for the increase of his honour and for the common good, to become a
knight errant, and to travel the world with his armour and his arms and
his horse in search of adventures.]19
This secondary belief introduces a dynamic element into the basic
delusion—it drives the hidalgo to re-invent himself as Don Quixote de
La Mancha and set out to restore the order of chivalry by his own
efforts. The aspiring knight errant will never waver in his primary belief
that the romances of chivalry are literally true, so in this respect he
cannot become less mad. However, the secondary level of the madness
was indeed capable of variation, and in due course this would allow
Cervantes the leeway to develop the character of Don Quixote by
exploiting the potential for self-doubt that lay in the hidalgo’s struggle
to realize his knightly destiny. It was this process of invención that
would take the mad old hidalgo far beyond the limits of the ridiculous
buffoon he might otherwise have remained.
The peculiar double madness of the protagonist was to become the
great engine of invention in Don Quixote but, paradoxically, the main
driver of innovation was the knight’s unyielding belief in the absolute
truth of the books of chivalry, for the inflexibility of this primary level
of the madness acted as a constraint which prevented Cervantes from
falling back on established modes of storytelling and, in this respect, it
acted as a spur to invent new ways of overcoming the problems he
encountered in the process of composition. The writing of Don Quixote,
then, became a great adventure for Cervantes, a voyage of discovery
whose destination was unforeseeable and unknown. As we shall see,
the narrative took shape gradually, passing through different stages and
transformations as the author faced the creative challenges presented
by the lunatic obsession which had taken hold of his would-be hero.20
The first stage: an exemplary spoof on the
Spanish books of chivalry
One can still discern in the first six chapters of the book the outline of
what was very likely Cervantes’s initial plan, namely, a brief parody of
a book of chivalry, perhaps of a length comparable to one of his
novellas, comprising a number of adventures undertaken by a crackpot
hidalgo. The story opens with an account of the habits of Alonso
Quijano, who spends his meagre income on libros de caballerías in
which he buries himself to such an extent that he decides to restore the
order of chivalry by becoming a knight errant himself. He changes his
name to the chivalric-sounding Don Quixote de La Mancha, gives his
old nag the name ‘Rocinante’, ‘nombre, a su parecer, alto, sonoro y
significativo’ [‘a name which, in his view, was lofty, sonorous and
meaningful’]21, and declares his devotion to Aldonza Lorenzo, a
strapping country girl who he believes is a princess called Dulcinea del
Toboso (El Toboso being another god-forsaken village in La Mancha).
Thus transformed, he sets off to make the world as good a place as that
described in the books that have driven him out of his mind.
As the novelist Milan Kundera observed, ‘When Don Quixote went
out into the world that world turned into a mystery before his eyes.
That is the legacy of the first European novel to the entire subsequent
history of the genre.’22 Yet why should the world have turned into a
mystery? Because Don Quixote interprets it through the prism of
chivalry: ‘a nuestro aventurero todo cuanto pensaba, veía o imaginaba
le parecía ser hecho y pasar al modo de lo que había leído’ [‘whatever
our adventurer thought, saw or imagined seemed to be as it was in the
books he’d read’].23 Anything that reminds him of his books is taken as
a sign of an ideal chivalric reality, and he will proclaim it as such in the
teeth of all empirical evidence to the contrary. Thus, when he arrives at
a roadside inn, he imagines it to be a castle and takes two tarts
loitering at the door to be genteel ladies, addressing them in archaic
courtly language, as he later does the innkeeper, whom he asks to
perform the ceremony of his initiation into knight-errantry. The
mischievous innkeeper recommends he spend that night in meditation
before being knighted the following morning. Don Quixote, however,
manages to get into fights with two muleteers who happen to interrupt
his nocturnal vigil. This is the first time the would-be knight errant
must face the fact that the world will not readily yield to his desires or
conform to his illusions.
Back on the road again, he comes across the boy Andrés, who is
being beaten by his master, and since one of the aims of his mission is
to right wrongs, he immediately assumes the lad is being wrongly
punished and so he challenges his tormentor to a duel. The latter feigns
compliance, but as soon as the knight has departed he resumes his
beating of the boy. Immediately after this presumed victory, Don
Quixote finds another opportunity for adventure by challenging a group
of merchants from Toledo to agree with his assertion that Dulcinea is
the most beautiful maiden in the world. Outraged by the merchants’
teasing response, he charges at them but is thrown off his saddle when
Rocinante stumbles; he is then beaten up so badly that he cannot pick
himself up off the ground. And yet, even in this extremity, he calls to
mind precedents for his plight in the literary tradition, reciting a well-
known ballad about the knight Valdovinos, who lay grievously
wounded after battle until the Marquis of Mantua came to his aid. A
neighbour, Pedro Alonso, happens to pass by and eventually manages
to get him back home, where he is put to bed to recover from his
injuries. This first sally concludes with the walling-up of Alonso
Quijano’s library after his books are subjected to a critical review by
the local priest and barber, who discuss which to spare and which to
consign to the flames. The burning of the madman’s books would have
provided a suitably moralizing ending to a burlesque sketch about a
man who lost his wits by reading too many romances of chivalry.
The second stage: a libro de caballerías in
miniature
At a certain point in the writing of this chivalric spoof Cervantes
decided that his initial idea was susceptible of further development. As
can be gathered from internal evidence, such as the seamless transition
from the present Chapter 5 to 6, the text of the first stage of
composition was continuous, but we can deduce that one of Cervantes’s
aims in expanding the story was to reproduce in microcosm the
structure of a libro de caballerías consisting of four ‘parts’, each of eight
chapters, in imitation of the ‘books’ into which the Spanish romances
were normally divided.24 This second stage of composition would also
feature two important inventions: a chronicler-narrator called Cide
Hamete Benengeli and a squire for Don Quixote in the form of the
illiterate peasant Sancho Panza. Both additions had their generic
precedents in the libro de caballerías but their roles in the parody would
comically diverge from their respective models in unforeseeably
productive ways.
Cide Hamete Benengeli and metafiction
In the first stage of writing, Cervantes had already indulged in a good
deal of equivocation over the sources by unnamed authors on which
the ‘history’ of Don Quixote was allegedly based. This playfulness
would continue throughout the whole of Part I: ‘The countless authorial
irruptions, asides, and interferences that constantly arise…are witness
to the complex, pervasive, and ever-changing narrative masks that
Cervantes assumed during the writing of his novel.’25 In this second
stage, however, Cervantes invented a new mask which would allow
him to parody the figure of the omniscient magician-chronicler, a
standard feature of a libro de caballerías. He came up with a
wonderfully original idea: instead of revising what he had already
written in order to insert this new chronicler at the beginning of the
story, he introduced him in medias res. At the point in the present
Chapter 8 when Don Quixote has raised his sword to engage an irate
Basque in combat, the narrative suddenly comes to a halt and we are
informed that the rest of the text has been lost. Cervantes then goes on
to relate how he, ‘el segundo autor desta obra’ [‘the second author of
this work’],26 happened upon some notebooks written in Arabic in a
street market in Toledo and took them to a Spanish Moor, who, for the
price of ‘dos arrobas de pasas y dos fanegas de trigo…prometió de
traducirlos bien y fielmente y con mucha brevedad’ [‘fifty pounds of
raisins and two bushels of wheat…promised to make a good, faithful
translation, and to be quick about it, too’].27 What came to light in the
translated text was a chronicle of Don Quixote’s adventures by an Arab
‘historian’ called Cide Hamete Benengeli, whose reliability was very
much open to doubt, ‘siendo muy propio de los de esa nación ser
mentirosos’ [since ‘it’s a well-known feature of Arabs that they’re all
liars’].28
This intrusion of Cervantes into his own fiction had a precedent in
the Spanish romances. The authors of libros de caballerías had tied
themselves up in knots in their efforts to create an illusion of historical
veracity for their ‘chronicles’.29 One of the knottiest examples occurred
in Las sergas de Esplandián [The Exploits of Esplandián] (1505), by Garci
Rodríguez de Montalvo, who was also the author of Amadís de Gaula.
Montalvo prevaricates about his exact role in the book—whether he is
the real author or simply an editor; the ostensible ‘chronicler’ is Master
Elisabad, who, we are told, only wrote about what he himself witnessed
or what he learned from reliable sources. Eventually, the pretence of
eyewitness narration becomes stretched to the limit as characters and
incidents proliferate seemingly at random; and poor Master Elisabad
has to trot the globe in order to keep up with Esplandián’s adventures.
Towards the middle of the book (in Chapters 98 and 99), Montalvo says
he grew tired of ‘revising’ such a badly organized narrative and decided
to abandon the task. Referring to himself in the first person, he begins
to give details of his life—a place-name, his taste for falconry, the
nature of the terrain, even the state of the weather; he goes on to relate
how he was transported in a dream or otherwise to the presence of
Urganda the Unknowable, the supreme enchantress in both Amadís de
Gaula and Esplandián. She upbraids him for being a man of little
learning but nevertheless puts him through a test; he is taken to a
chamber where the principal characters in the romance are seated on
thrones, and he is asked to pick the most beautiful lady and the most
valiant knight. Approving of his choices, Urganda authorizes him to
resume working on the Esplandián, since she now believes he would not
say anything that was not true. Montalvo’s credentials are thereby
validated by no less an authority than the supreme sorceress from
within his own fiction.
Montalvo’s tortuous efforts to reconcile the unbelievable fantasies of
the libros de caballerías with their concomitant claim to historical
veracity are parodied by Cervantes by transforming his predecessor’s
self-referential techniques into a playful mediation of Don Quixote’s
exploits to the reader, involving, in turn, Cervantes himself, who
becomes a character within his own book, the dodgy Hispano-Arab
translator, and Cide Hamete Benengeli, the mendacious Arab historian,
who will become the prototype of that ubiquitous device in modern
fiction: the unreliable narrator. Far from fostering an illusion of
historicity, Cervantes turned the act of storytelling into a self-conscious
performance which showed that Don Quixote’s adventures had nothing
to do with history but were entirely, and gloriously, fictional.
Cide Hamete’s startling irruption into the book has rightly been
hailed as a brilliant, pioneering example of metafiction, but Cervantes
had not yet fully appreciated the rich promise of his invention. Having
been conceived as a device to introduce each of the four ‘parts’ of the
intended miniature libro de caballerías, the Arab chronicler would be
confined to this ancillary role for the rest of Part I, in which he is
referred to only five times by name and twice indirectly. Thus,
Benengeli at this stage was just another of the various authorial masks
adopted by Cervantes in his general comic prevarication over the text’s
veracity; however, in Part II he would give a sharper focus to his
metafictional play by assigning to Cide Hamete a much more
substantial and complex role as sole chronicler and narrator of the text,
while reserving for himself the part of sceptical commentator on the
reliability of the Arab historian’s chronicle.30
Sancho Panza and ‘perspectivism’
With the invention of Sancho Panza, Don Quixote would be forced to
engage in a sustained dialogue with another character whose point of
view would be at odds with his chivalric ‘interpretations’ of reality, and
this disparity of perspectives would be comically reinforced by
disparities of language, manners, values, attitudes, and temperament to
such a degree that the dialectic between knight and squire would
threaten to level differences of status and value. But more than this,
Don Quixote’s approach to reality would acquire a more consistent
epistemological character. In the first stage of composition, the knight
had approached everyday situations by referring them to fanciful
literary precedents in the books of chivalry, but now he has to contend
with the peasant’s empirical common sense, so his ‘interpretations’
become a matter of dispute, as in the iconic episode in which he tilts at
windmills (I.8). Having proclaimed them to be giants, he brushes aside
Sancho’s warnings and goes on the attack but comes to grief when he
gets entangled in a windmill’s sails.
The more the knight is forced to argue with Sancho, all the more
ingenious or unexpected will become his justifications of failure. In
Chapter 21, on seeing a barber wearing a brass basin on his head to
shield him from the rain, Don Quixote declares it to be the enchanted
helmet of the Moorish King Mambrino, which the knight Rinaldo
captured in Ariosto’s Orlando Furioso; Sancho insists it is just a basin.
Don Quixote challenges the barber, who runs off in terror leaving his
basin and donkey’s packsaddle behind. The issue of whether these
objects are a magic helmet and a horse’s caparison or a barber’s basin
and a donkey’s packsaddle will become a running dispute between
master and servant. It crops up again several chapters later, and on this
occasion the exasperated knight will appear to concede a certain
relativism in other people’s perceptions of reality:
Andan entre nosotros siempre una caterva de encantadores que todas
nuestras cosas mudan y truecan, y las vuelven según su gusto y según
tienen la gana de favorecernos o destruirnos; y así, eso que a ti te
parece bacía de barbero me parece a mí el yelmo de Mambrino y a otro
le parecerá otra cosa.
[We are always attended by a crew of enchanters who keep
transforming everything and changing it into whatever they like,
according to whether they have a mind to help or destroy us; and so
what looks to you like a barber’s basin looks to me like Mambrino’s
helmet, and will look like something else to another person.]31
Don Quixote is not saying that one man’s view is as good as another’s;
he believes that enchanters contrive ‘que parezca bacía a todos lo que
real y verdaderamente es yelmo de Mambrino’ [‘making everyone take
what is really and truly Mambrino’s helmet for a barber’s basin’].32
Sancho is torn between accepting what he can see with his own eyes or
deferring to his knight’s version of reality, and in a later scene, he will
coin the term baciyelmo, a hybrid of bacía (basin) and yelmo (helmet)
[‘basinelmet’],33 in order to effect a compromise between sense-
perception and respect for his master.
The question of Mambrino’s helmet has provoked much debate on
the notion of ‘perspectivism’, a term which refers to the way
Cervantes’s writing often suggests that perceptions of reality may vary
according to the individual, and which many critics take to be a sign of
Cervantes’s sense of what Américo Castro famously called ‘la realidad
oscilante’ [‘the oscillating reality’] of the world, given the unstable,
‘ambiguous’ nature of human perceptions and experiences.34 Although I
believe it is anachronistic to see Cervantes endorsing ‘perspectivism’ in
this relativistic sense, it is certainly true that he can at times create
situations 
which, 
for 
comic 
purposes, 
appear 
to 
resemble
kaleidoscopically shifting representations of different points of view. A
good example is Don Quixote’s blundering tryst at the inn in Chapter
16, in which he gets caught up in a sordid assignation between a
muleteer and the hunch-backed serving-wench Maritornes. When she
comes to see her fancy-man in the guests’ dormitory that night, Don
Quixote assumes she is the love-struck daughter of the lord of the castle
who has come to lie with him in his chamber. He pulls her down onto
his bed and apologises to this ‘fermosa doncella’ [‘beautiful damsel’]
and ‘diosa de la hermosura’ [‘goddess of beauty’] for being unable to
reciprocate her love because of his unyielding devotion to Dulcinea.
The muleteer, suspecting that Maritornes ‘le hubiese faltado la palabra
por otro’ [‘might have broken his promise to him for another man’],
deals Don Quixote a terrible blow. But when Maritornes hears the
innkeeper approaching the dormitory, she huddles up in Sancho’s bed:
‘todo medrosica y alborotada…se acurrucó e hizo un ovillo’ [‘agitated
and frightened…she rolled herself up into a little ball’], a picture of coy
vulnerability that is shattered by her boss’s exasperated cry: ‘¿Adónde
estás, puta? A buen seguro que son tus cosas éstas’ [‘Where are you,
you little tart? I know this is all your doing’].35 Sancho’s slumber is
disturbed by this commotion and, thinking he is having a nightmare, he
starts hitting Maritornes, who fights back, but the muleteer, like some
grotesque knight errant, ‘viendo…cual andaba su dama…acudió a darle
el socorro necesario’ [‘seeing the plight his lady was in, went to give
her the help she needed’]. Each character has a different take on
Maritornes, depending on the designs they have on her or on the way
she affects them: she is a ‘goddess of beauty’ for Don Quixote, a
‘faithless wench’ but then a ‘lady’ for the muleteer, a ‘little tart’ for the
innkeeper, and a ‘nightmare’ for Sancho, whereas she herself affects a
vulnerable innocence.
* * *
It is still possible to imagine how Cervantes would likely have brought
his miniature romance of chivalry to an end. After Don Quixote’s
wrong-headed ‘liberation’ of a chain-gang of galley slaves in Chapter
22, the knight and squire decide to go up into the wild mountains of
the Sierra Morena in order to escape arrest by the Holy Brotherhood
(the rural police force). There, in imitation of Amadis and Orlando
when they had been spurned by their respective ladies, Don Quixote
takes it into his head to feign a ‘love madness’ as evidence of his
passion for Dulcinea. He resolves to send his squire to deliver a love-
letter to the lady in El Toboso, but first he asks Sancho to watch him
perform some ‘mad’ deeds so that he may describe them to her as
evidence of the intensity of his devotion. On his way to El Toboso,
Sancho comes to a roadside inn where he finds the priest and barber,
who are looking for the demented hidalgo in order to bring him safely
home. The pair have devised a plan: the barber will get himself up in
female garb and appeal to Don Quixote to defend her, a damsel in
distress, against a wicked knight, while the priest will pretend to be her
squire. Sancho agrees to help them, and they all make their way to the
Sierra Morena to meet up with the mad knight (I.26–27). The Quixote-
Sancho storyline could conceivably have been rounded off by having
the disguised priest and the barber-in-drag persuade the old hidalgo—
no doubt after a few more comic episodes—to accompany them back to
their village. Cervantes would thereby have brought his four-part
miniature romance of chivalry to a coherent and exemplary conclusion,
with Sancho playing a crucial role in its denouement. Such an ending,
however, was not to be, for the thread of the narrative was severely
disrupted shortly after Sancho, the priest, and the barber reach the
Sierra Morena (I.27).
As he was to explain in Part II, Chapter 44, Cervantes found that ‘el
ir siempre atenido…a escribir de un solo sujeto y hablar por las bocas
de pocas personas era un trabajo incomportable, cuyo fruto no
redundaba en el de su autor’ [to be ‘always constrained to writing
about one subject and speaking through the mouths of so few
characters was intolerable drudgery, which yielded nothing to the
author’s advantage’].36 He feared that if he stuck to the ‘historia tan
seca y limitada’ [‘dry and limited story’] of Don Quixote, ‘se desprecie
su trabajo’ [he might be ‘scorned for his labours’], ‘teniendo habilidad,
suficiencia y entendimiento para tratar del universo todo’ [even though
he had ‘the ability, capacity, and intelligence to deal with the entire
universe’].37 We find here Cervantes being tempted to display his
powers of invención to greater advantage by adhering more closely to
established modes of narrative and to contemporary literary theory,
which prized abundance of topics and variety of incidents in
storytelling. His frustration with the restrictions imposed by the
Quixote-Sancho relationship therefore impelled him to break out of the
framework of a miniature romance of chivalry and turn his parody of
the libros de caballerías into a longer, grander, and more prestigious
type of work, which would more likely earn him the admiration of the
reading public, raise his status in the literary world, and perhaps win
him the favour of a noble patron.
But how to introduce greater variety? He decided to weave a
number of extraneous stories into the main narrative, a practice already
found in books of chivalry, in the Renaissance epic, in pastoral
romances, and even in the emerging genre of picaresque fiction. Even
so, he was conscious of an incompatibility between the story of the
crackpot knight and the separate tales: ‘[M]uchos, llevados de la
atención que piden las hazañas de don Quijote, no la darían a las
novelas, y pasarían por ellas o con priesa o con enfado, sin advertir la
gala y artificio que en sí contienen, el cual se mostrara bien al
descubierto, cuando por sí solas, sin arrimarse a las locuras de don
Quijote ni a las sandeces de Sancho, salieran a luz’ [‘[M]any people,
with all their attention engrossed by the deeds of Don Quixote, might
not have any attention left for the tales, and might leaf through them in
haste or exasperation, without noticing their elegance and artistry,
which would have been plain to see had they been published by
themselves and not as mere adjuncts to Don Quixote’s mad antics and
to Sancho’s tomfoolery’].38 He went ahead, nevertheless, and
abandoned the plan for a four-part structure, dropped any further
references to Cide Hamete Benengeli (the Arab historian is last
mentioned in the final sentence of Chapter 27, i.e. the end of the third
‘part’ of the projected mini-romance), and thereafter he allowed the
book to digress periodically from the principal storyline into a series of
extraneous tales.
The third phase: the interpolated tales
There are six interpolated tales in Part I: two are pastoral, one is a so-
called ‘Moorish’ romance, another is an Italian-style novella, the rest
tell of star-crossed lovers in situations that are similar to the love-plots
that were so popular in the contemporary Spanish theatre. The
interweaving of these tales came about by stages.39 The first was the
insertion of the story of Marcela, which Cervantes originally placed in
the mountains of the Sierra Morena, where Don Quixote and Sancho
had withdrawn after the debacle with the galley slaves in Chapter 23.
Knight and squire come across some goatherds, who invite them to
share a rustic meal with them round the fire. This simple hospitality
puts Don Quixote in mind of the myth of the Golden Age, and he
delivers a fairly lucid speech, extolling the virtues of a time of
innocence and natural plenty in which things were held in common,
truth and justice upheld, and maidens could go about the countryside
at will without fear of being harmed by men’s ‘lascivo intento’ [‘lewd
designs’], unlike in ‘estos nuestros detestables siglos’ [‘these detestable
times of ours’].40 A goatherd then tells the story of a rich farmer’s
daughter who has become a shepherdess in order to enjoy her freedom.
All the young men of the region are in love with her, especially
Grisóstomo, but since Marcela refused to accept him, he has died in
despair by his own hand. Marcela herself makes an appearance at
Grisóstomo’s burial and refuses to be blamed for his death: she did not
encourage Grisóstomo and is under no obligation to accede to the
wishes of a youth who happened to fall in love with her. Although not
an overt parody of the pastoral genre, the story is consistent with the
broad aim of the Quixote in that it shows up the absurdity of youths
dressing up as shepherds and wandering about pining for a girl who
refuses to conform to type.
Having once departed from the principal narrative, Cervantes was
tempted to do so again. This time he added a story about two pairs of
lovers, Cardenio-Luscinda and Dorotea-Fernando. Cardenio loves
Luscinda but her father will not permit their marriage. His friend
Fernando offers to intercede on his behalf but falls madly in love with
the girl and asks for her hand. When a letter is discovered stating that
Luscinda is already secretly married to Cardenio, Fernando abducts her
all the same. It then transpires that Fernando had previously seduced
Dorotea on the promise of marriage but had disappeared after she
succumbed. Dorotea, however, sets off to find him and make him keep
his word. In due course, each of the women will be restored to her
original lover. Accommodating this two-fold tale in the main narrative
required several adjustments to the text. Marcela’s tale was moved
forwards from the Sierra Morena to the present Chapters 11–14.
Despite the fact that Marcela’s story had been relocated to a plain,
traces of its original placement in the Sierra Morena can still be found
in the text, as in the reference to ‘these mountains and these valleys’41
or to ‘those sierras’.42 Cervantes then used the wild setting of the Sierra
Morena to introduce by degrees each of the two strands comprising the
new interpolated tale. Cardenio appears in Chapter 23 as a man who
roams the mountains, having been driven mad with anguish at the loss
of his sweetheart, Luscinda. This links him with Don Quixote, who will
take it into his head to feign a ‘love-madness’ for his lady (I.25).
Dorotea is later also discovered in the Sierra Morena dressed as a boy
(I.28), and in the next chapter, she volunteers to replace the barber in
the role of ‘damsel in distress’ by pretending to be the Princess
Micomicona and asking Don Quixote to rid her of a giant who is
allegedly ravaging her lands. The two threads of the double tale are
thus partially assimilated into the main Quixote narrative through a
burlesque association with chivalric tropes: Cardenio’s ‘love-madness’
and Dorotea’s ‘damsel in distress’. But where to set the happy ending
required of a romance? Cervantes chose the inn where in Chapter 32
Don Quixote, Sancho Panza, the priest and barber, together with
Cardenio and Dorotea, eventually arrive on their way back from the
Sierra Morena. This humble inn would become the focal point for the
convergence of all but one of the remaining interpolated tales in Part I.
Cervantes was clearly delighted at having woven these extraneous
stories into the main narrative, and congratulated himself on his
invención: ‘gozamos ahora en esta nuestra edad, necesitada de alegres
entretenimientos, no sólo de la dulzura de su verdadera historia [i.e.
Don Quixote’s], sino de los cuentos y episodios della, que en parte no
son menos agradables y artificiosos y verdaderos, que la misma
historia’ [‘we can now enjoy, in this age of ours, so much in need of
amusing entertainments, not only the delights of [Don Quixote’s] true
history but also stories and episodes inserted into it, for in some ways
they are no less agreeable or imaginative or true than the history
itself’].43 He went on to add two further stories, El curioso impertinente,
modelled on the Italian novella and set in Florence, and Historia del
capitán cautivo, which drew on his own five-year captivity in Algiers.
Both were placed in the inn where the other characters were already
gathered; but incorporated in the frame-narrative in different ways.
El curioso impertinente is presented as straight fiction. It is found by
chance among papers in a suitcase, and the priest reads it to the other
guests (I.33–5). Anselmo weds the virtuous Camila but conceives an
irresistible desire to put her fidelity to the test, so he asks his best
friend Lotario to pretend to seduce her. Though he at first refuses,
Lotario reluctantly agrees, on the insistence of Anselmo. Camila resists
her seducer but surrenders in the end to a passionate affair. When
Anselmo eventually finds out, his anguish at the folly of his
‘impertinent curiosity’ brings about his death, Lotario goes off to war
and is killed in battle, and Camila expires shortly after hearing of her
lover’s demise. When he finishes reading the story, the priest judges it
‘impossible’ that a husband could be so foolish as to put his wife’s
virtue to the test in such a fashion; even so, ‘en lo que toca al modo de
contarle, no me descontenta’ [‘Yet the way in which it’s told doesn’t
displease me at all’].44
El capitán cautivo is introduced immediately after the priest finishes
reading this story. A Spanish captain arrives at the inn accompanied by
a mysterious Moorish woman (I.36), and gives a lengthy account of
their escape from Algiers (I.39–41), describing how he was approached
by Zoraida, the daughter of a rich merchant, who wanted to become a
Christian, having been inspired to a devotion to the Virgin Mary by a
Christian slave woman. The story mostly deals with the risky
preparations for the hazardous sea-journey to freedom in Spain, but in
order to create a denouement for the Captain’s tale, Cervantes invented
yet another story. A judge arrives at the inn with his beautiful, sixteen-
year-old daughter Clara; it transpires that he is none other than the
Captain’s brother, and there is an emotional reunion of the long-lost
siblings. At the dawn of the following day, a young footman turns up at
the inn singing a beautiful love-song, which betrays his true identity as
Clara’s desperate suitor, the aristocratic Don Luis, who has abandoned
his father’s house in disguise in order to follow his sweetheart. Hot on
his heels, however, come four horsemen, his father’s servants, who
have been sent to apprehend him and take him home (I.43); Don Luis
refuses to return, and explains his predicament to the judge, who,
seeing the prospect of an advantageous marriage for his daughter,
approves of the match as long as Luis’s distraught father gives his
consent.
All the interpolated tales have one thing in common—they share the
basic features of literary romance: the characters are beautiful and
well-born, they are concerned with questions of love and honour, and
the action is articulated through marvellous coincidences and
discoveries. But Cervantes faced a problem: how could he interpolate
romantic tales in a frame-narrative that was itself a parody of the
idealizing tendencies inherent in all kinds of romance? Contrary to the
view that with the interpolation of these tales into Don Quixote ‘a
highly imaginative literary world becomes a credible actuality;
romance and reality are synthesized’,45 I would argue that Cervantes
kept hinting at the tensions between parody and romance whenever the
two modes came into contact with one another, so that the tales work
in their own right but the manner of their incorporation into the frame-
narrative gently exposes their artifice, suggesting an ironic interplay
between fact and fiction which is the basic concern of the Quixote
itself.46 Thanks to a succession of coincidences, which Cervantes does
nothing to disguise and not a little to underline, and which are
repeatedly attributed to el cielo (Heaven), the love-stories converge on a
single place—the inn, which Don Quixote insists is an enchanted castle.
The orchestration of this accelerating series of tales, with denouements
involving 
melodramatic 
recognitions 
and 
reunions 
of 
various
exceptionally beautiful, well-born characters, resulted in a complex
fabric of adventures and episodes allegedly brought about by
Providence but which nevertheless kept criss-crossing the line between
the supposedly ‘real’ everyday world and Don Quixote’s chivalric
fantasies. Indeed, the mad knight himself is amazed by the incredible
train of events: ‘Allí don Quijote estaba atento, sin hablar palabra,
considerando estos tan estraños sucesos, atribuyéndolos todos a
quimeras de la andante caballería’ [‘Don Quixote sat there watching,
uttering not a word, pondering over such extraordinary events and
putting them down to the chimeras of knight-errantry’].47
As if to crown his virtuoso performance in ironic brinkmanship,
Cervantes placed at the very apex of the pyramid of love-stories he had
raised within his chivalric parody a scene in which all the diverse
characters who have progressively gathered at the inn become involved
in a sort of trial to determine the nature of reality. In Chapter 44 there
occurs yet another amazing coincidence—the arrival of the barber from
whom Don Quixote had taken Mambrino’s helmet. This coincidence,
however, is quite different from all the previous ones, for it is not
Heaven but the Devil himself who has intervened in the action: ‘[E]l
demonio, que no duerme, ordenó que en aquel mesmo punto entró en
la venta el barbero a quien don Quijote quitó el yelmo de Mambrino’
[‘the devil, who never sleeps, brought into the inn that barber from
whom Don Quixote had taken Mambrino’s helmet’].48 The angry barber
asks for his basin and pack-saddle, but Don Quixote insists they are a
helmet and a horse’s caparison. Nevertheless, in a magnanimous
gesture, he concedes that wicked enchanters may well have sown
confusion in that ‘castle’, so he asks the other characters to judge these
objects for themselves: ‘tendrán los entendimientos libres y podrán
juzgar las cosas de este castillo como ellas son real y verdaderamente, y
no como a mí me parecían’ [‘your understanding is unclouded, and you
can form judgements about the affairs of this castle as they really and
truly are, rather than as they appeared to me’].49 The priest, Don
Fernando, and the other noble characters secretly agree to vote in
favour of Don Quixote and declare that the barber’s basin really is
Mambrino’s helmet and the donkey’s packsaddle a horse’s caparison.
When the wronged barber protests at this outrageous verdict, chaos
ensues:
De modo que toda la venta era llantos, voces, gritos, confusiones,
temores, sobresaltos, desgracias, cuchilladas, mojicones, palos, coces y
efusión de sangre. Y en la mitad deste caos, máquina y laberinto de
cosas, se le representó en la memoria de don Quijote que se veía metido
de hoz y de coz en la discordia del campo de Agramante.
[So the inn was all tears, shouts, screams, confusion, fear, alarm,
disasters, flashing knives, flying fists, flailing cudgels, pounding feet,
and flowing blood. And in the midst of this chaos, this labyrinth, this
edifice of mischief, Don Quixote took it into his head that he was in the
thick of the turmoil in King Agramante’s camp.]50
The coincidence created by the Devil thus brings about discord
instead of harmony, confusion instead of providential design; so much
so that the chaos reminds Don Quixote of a famous scene in Orlando
Furioso, and he cries out in exasperation: ‘No os dije yo, señores, que
este castillo era encantado, y que alguna región de demonios debe de
habitar en él?’ [‘Did I not tell you, sirs, that this castle is enchanted,
and that some legion of devils must inhabit it?’].51 He calls for the
judge and priest to restore order, but the Devil soon stirs things up
again:
[V]iéndose el enemigo de la concordia y el émulo de la paz [i.e. the Devil]
menospreciado y burlado, y el poco fruto que había granjeado de
haberlos puesto a todos en tan confuso laberinto, acordó de probar otra
vez la mano, resucitando nuevas pendencias y desasosiegos.
[But the enemy of concord and adversary of peace, finding himself
scorned and outwitted, and seeing how little it had benefited him to
embroil them all in that labyrinth of confusion, decided to try his luck
again by reviving old quarrels and disturbances.]52
Thanks to yet another diabolical coincidence, three officers of the rural
police happen to arrive at the inn (I.45) and are utterly bewildered by
the outcome of the dispute. One of the officers suddenly recognizes Don
Quixote as the delinquent who had released the galley-slaves in
Chapter 22. When he attempts to arrest him, the mad knight grabs him
by the throat and another dust-up threatens until Don Fernando and
the priest manage to calm things down at last. They explain to the
police officers that Don Quixote is mad, pay off the barber for his lost
basin, and compensate the innkeeper for the damage caused by his
deranged guest.
In his build-up of denouements at the inn, Cervantes exaggerated the
role of coincidence—arrivals, discoveries, and reunions follow one
upon the other at an ever-quickening pace, and at the end of the series
he placed two devilish interventions that suddenly cause the narrative
to veer into head-spinning farce. The work of the Devil at this final
confluence of the interpolated stories with the frame-narrative may
have been burlesque in intent but it also casts a shadow of doubt on the
plausibility of the role of providence as a narrative device, for in the
end it is money and not el cielo that restores order to the inn: the
unyielding madness of Don Quixote, in other words, had forced
Cervantes to subject the role of providential author to the base logic of
the main narrative. And it was at this juncture, when parody had
finally consumed the idealizing processes of romance, that Cervantes
chose to place two long dialogues on the art of fiction: the first between
the priest and the canon of Toledo, a new character whom Don
Quixote’s party meet on their way back home, and the second between
the canon and the mad knight himself. However, given their length and
importance, these dialogues deserve separate consideration in a section
below.
* * *
The remaining chapters describe the return of Don Quixote to his
village. He is bound hand and foot while asleep and placed in a
wooden cage, which is then mounted on an ox-cart to convey him back
home. The knight assumes he has been put under a diabolical spell but
is consoled by a ‘prophecy’ foretelling his eventual marriage to
Dulcinea. In the penultimate chapter, Cervantes inserted the last of the
interpolated stories, a cautionary tale on a fairly hackneyed topic,
which reprises aspects of the earlier tales. A goatherd called Eugenio
tells the story of Leandra, who spurns the rival suitors Anselmo and
Eugenio, as well as many other local youths, yet elopes with a braggart
soldier, Vicente; she is eventually found abandoned in a mountain cave,
robbed of her money and jewels, and is sent to a convent by her father
to atone for her disgrace. Cervantes reconciled the tale with the main
narrative by ending it with a parody of the ‘love-madness’.53 After
Leandra is put away in the nunnery, the lovelorn Anselmo and Eugeno
dress up as herdsmen and wander about the countryside lamenting
their fruitless devotion, and they are joined in this ‘locura’ [‘madness’]
by other ‘disparatados’ [‘lunatics’]: ‘“Leandra” resuenan las montes,
“Leandra” murmuran los arroyos, y Leandra nos tiene a todos suspensos
y encantados’ [‘“Leandra” the mountains ring out, “Leandra” murmur
the streams, and Leandra has us all in suspense and under her spell’].54
In the last chapter, this burlesque conclusion tips over into farce when
Don Quixote offers to attack the nunnery in order to release Leandra;
the teller of the tale suggests he must be mad, so the knight strikes him
with a loaf of bread and a ridiculous scrap ensues. Shortly afterwards,
Don Quixote encounters a group of penitents who are taking a statue of
the Virgin Mary to a nearby shrine; believing they are abducting a
beautiful lady, he attacks them but is beaten up and nearly killed.
When the battered knight finally arrives home, he is put to bed by his
niece and housekeeper, who curse the books of chivalry which have
caused him to end up in such a state.
Part I draws to a close with a reference to a rumoured third sally, in
which our knight is said to have attended a jousting tournament in
Zaragoza, but the author cannot confirm this information because no
further accounts of his exploits have been found. The only available
documents tell of Don Quixote’s death, and they are accompanied by
four burlesque sonnets dedicated respectively to the knight, Dulcinea,
Rocinante, and Sancho Panza, as well as by an epitaph for his grave
and another for Dulcinea’s. With this ambiguous conclusion, Cervantes
left the door half-open for a possible sequel to the story of the crazy
hidalgo of La Mancha.
The Canon of Toledo and the art of fiction
The most important thinking on narrative fiction in the Renaissance
took place in Italy, where, after the publication of Francesco
Robortello’s commentary on the Poetics (1548), Aristotle became the
principal authority in debates about literature. The romance of
chivalry, as the major form of lengthy narrative that had survived from
the Middle Ages, attracted the attention of theorists who sought to
define its generic properties according to classical precepts. However,
as Bernard Weinberg has shown, much neoclassical thinking was based
on distortions or misunderstandings of the Poetics.55 Aristotle’s mimesis,
the imitation ‘of action and life’, crystallized into the Renaissance
notion of ‘verisimilitude’, which conceived poetic truth as conditional
upon its approximation to empirical reality, and thus left little place in
theory for the ideal or the marvellous. Aristotle’s ‘unity of action’ was
seen, not in terms of necessity and probability in the articulation of a
plot, but rather on the basis of the unities of time and place, or as a
thematic correspondence between the different parts, or on a principle
of decorum, which required characters to conform to fixed types, say
fitting things, behave correctly, and generally be consistent with their
supposed counterparts in nature. As regards the ends of poetry, and
given the Council of Trent’s strictures on literature, aesthetic pleasure
was subordinated to the requirement that poets include philosophical
reflections and morally edifying examples in their work. Many
theorists, however, were prepared to relax these neo-Aristotelian
principles so as to accommodate some of the qualities of the Orlando
Furioso, such as its pleasing variety of adventures and especially its
capacity to arouse the highly-prized effect of admiratio, the
wonderment or surprise produced by the revelation of unknown or
unexpected marvels, often supernatural.56 Renaissance debates on
narrative fiction thus tended to revolve around three sets of
oppositions: verisimilitude and the marvellous, unity and variety,
pleasure and moral profit.57
In Don Quixote these issues are reflected in the discussion between
the priest and the canon of Toledo (I.47–8). The former complains
about the moral hazards involved in reading libros de caballerías, while
the canon, who is influenced by neo-Aristotelian poetics, criticizes them
for their lack of unity and verisimilitude, their lapses in decorum, and
their general disregard for the moral ends of literature. Even so, he
praises the freedom they afford a writer to display the full scope of his
imagination. He even confesses to having once tried his hand at writing
a romance of chivalry, though he gave up when he realized that the
general public cared nothing for the rules of art and his theoretical
rectitude would be appreciated by no more than a handful of
discerning readers (I.48).
The canon’s critique of the romances implies a conflict between
literary authority (the importance of rules) and a writer’s creative
freedom, an issue which was central to Cervantes’s concerns, but the
canon’s opinions should not be regarded as entirely representative of
Cervantes’s own. The latter was, of course, aware of the major issues
that were discussed by contemporary theorists,58 but as a working
writer he found his own creative solutions to problems of composition
and tended to explore the nature of his craft in the context of the
dynamics between his characters. In this regard, it is telling that he has
the canon of Toledo engage in a second dialogue, this time with the
greatest champion of the romances of chivalry, Don Quixote himself
(I.49–50). The canon asks the knight how he could possibly believe that
the fantasies of the libros de caballerías were true. He urges him to use
his intelligence: ‘[D]uélase de sí mismo, redúzgase al gremio de la
discreción’ [‘[T]ake pity on yourself, and restore yourself to the bosom
of good sense’].59 The canon, however, is in for a surprise: Don Quixote
does indeed use his intelligence but in a spirited defence of the truth of
the romances. It is the canon, says the knight, who is ‘sin juicio y
encantado’ [‘out of your senses and under some spell’]60 for denying
the true existence of the famous knights of old, whose lives and feats
have been recorded in books licensed for publication by the authority
of the king, no less: ‘Calle vuestra merced, no diga tal blasfemia, y
créame que le aconsejo en esto lo que debe de hacer como discreto, si
no léalos y verá el gusto que recibe de su leyenda’ [‘Hold your tongue,
sir, and do not voice such blasphemies, and believe me, I am advising
you now to act as a man of good sense should; only read them, and you
will find out for yourself how much pleasure they afford you’].61
Pleasure (‘gusto’), for Don Quixote, is sufficient evidence of the truth
of the romances, and by way of demonstration he tells the canon a brief
tale about a knight who comes across a lake of boiling tar and is invited
by ‘una voz tristísima’ [‘a plaintive voice’]62 to dive into it. He is
rewarded with a marvellous experience, finding himself in a flower-
strewn meadow and greeted by beautiful maidens who take him to a
castle where they disrobe and bathe him; then, the most beautiful of all
the girls sits by his side at dinner and relates the story of that
enchanted place, ‘con otras cosas que suspenden al caballero y admiran a
los leyentes que van leyendo su historia’ [‘and other matters that amaze
the knight and astonish the readers of his history’].63 Don Quixote
concludes by assuring the canon that the books of chivalry are not only
beneficial—‘destierran la melancolía que tuviere y le mejoran la
condición, si acaso la tiene mala’ [‘they banish any melancholy you
may be feeling, and improve your disposition, if it is a bad one’]64—but
also morally edifying, and he cites the virtues he has himself cultivated
thanks to their example.
By having the canon discuss the libros de caballerías with the
madman and putting Don Quixote on a broadly equal footing with the
neo-Aristotelian cleric in this debate, Cervantes would appear to be
attracted to some at least of the points the knight makes in his defence
of the romances, even if not exactly convinced by them. Indeed, the
madman’s case against the canon cannot be entirely dismissed as
nonsense, for in his championing of the ‘truth’ of the imagination by
virtue of its capacity to give pleasure and evoke admiratio, and by
claiming beneficial qualities for it too, he implicitly raises a
fundamental question: does fiction possess inherent value, or must it
always be underwritten and justified by some ‘higher’ authority?
The evolution of Don Quixote’s madness
In the earliest stage of the parody, Don Quixote’s engagement with
other people involved little more than head-on clashes with the
everyday business of the real world, but these clashes would have
become tedious had Cervantes not sought to vary the mad knight’s
solipsistic behaviour. In the encounter with the merchants of Toledo,
for example, where he challenges them to agree with his assertion that
Dulcinea is the fairest maiden of all, he is outraged by their request for
him to show them the lady: ‘Si os la mostrara…¿que hiciérades
vosotros en confesar verdad tan notoria? La importancia está en que sin
verla lo habéis de creer, confesar, afirmar jurar y defender; donde no,
conmigo sois en batalla, gente descomunal y soberbia’ [‘If I were to let
you see her…what merit would there be in confessing so manifest a
truth? The whole point is that, without seeing her, you must believe,
confess, affirm, swear and uphold it; if not, monstrous and arrogant
wretches, you shall face me in battle forthwith’].65 This is a
preposterous reply, of course, but an amusing one too because of its
sheer unexpectedness. We get an inkling here of what will become a
critical factor in Cervantes’s handling of the madness: the knight’s
ability to surprise other people (and the reader) through his
ingeniosidad, his ‘ingeniousness’, the wit and pluck he shows in
explaining away his failures or getting out of tight spots. As Gerald
Brenan observed, Cervantes gives the impression that the mad knight is
‘more intelligent’ than ‘any of the persons who are shown to us as
sane’, especially ‘in those delicious passages where Don Quixote pours
out a flood of subtle and convincing arguments to support a view that
anyone can see is erroneous. His mind works more lucidly when it has
a worse case to defend. If we stop to think a moment, we may well
wonder where the author is taking us’.66
The knight’s ingeniosidad will become increasingly evident after he is
accompanied by Sancho Panza, since he must justify his fantasies to his
often sceptical squire. The adventure of the sheep (I.18) will reveal a
new quality of the madness. He declares the two flocks of sheep to be
two armies about to attack each other and launches into an
impassioned evocation of the great warriors who are set to engage in
battle. Utterly fanciful though it is, Don Quixote’s vision achieves a
compelling poetic force, and Sancho is ‘colgado de sus palabras’
[‘hanging on his every word’],67 yet totally perplexed at not being able
to see anything other than sheep.68 Gradually, therefore, the madness
itself becomes a cause of wonder (admiratio), as is shown in the
reaction of the priest and barber when they come across Sancho on his
way to El Toboso: ‘Quedaron admirados los dos de lo que Sancho Panza
les contaba; y aunque ya sabían la locura de don Quijote y el género
della, siempre que la oían se admiraban de nuevo’ [‘They were both
amazed at what Sancho Panza was telling them, because although they
knew that Don Quixote was mad and they knew what sort of madness
it was, whenever they heard about it again they were amazed again’].69
In Chapter 30 the madness undergoes a further mutation, when the
priest feels sorry for the knight: ‘¿[N]o es cosa estraña ver con cuánta
facilidad cree este desventurado hidalgo todas estas invenciones y
mentiras, sólo porque llevan el estilo y modo de las necedades de sus
libros?’ [‘But isn’t it extraordinary how this unfortunate hidalgo
believes all these lies and fictions, just because they imitate the style
and manner of the nonsense in his books?’].70 And yet, he observes
that, ‘si le tratan de otras cosas discurre con bonísimas razones y
muestra tener un entendimiento claro y apacible en todo’ [‘in
conversations on other subjects he talks with great good sense, and
shows himself to have a clear and balanced judgement’].71 This
phenomenon has become known as the mad-sane (cuerdo-loco) paradox,
and in response to it, the priest goes beyond admiratio—he feels pity at
the condition of the wretched lunatic, trapped as he is in a ridiculous
madness despite his obvious intelligence. Indeed, Cervantes’s discovery
of the inherent pathos of the knight’s condition was made possible by
the sheer inflexibility of his absolute belief in the truth of the chivalry
books, which precludes him from reasoning his way out of his crazy
obsession. But, ironically, this fundamental constraint imposed by the
primary madness served as a spur to Cervantes’s invención and was to
lead to a critical shift towards literary character as a new source of
admiratio capable of replacing the implausible fantasies that had so
discredited the books of chivalry. Cervantes congratulated himself
through the medium of Cardenio for his invention of the mad-sane
paradox: ‘[Es una cosa] tan rara y nunca vista, que yo no sé si
queriendo inventarla y fabricarla mentirosamente, hubiera tan agudo
ingenio que pudiera dar en ella’ [‘The whole business is so weird and
wonderful that I can’t believe that if anyone wanted to invent such a
story he’d be clever enough to do it’].72
In Chapter 38, when Don Quixote weighs up the respective merits of
the careers of Arms and Letters in a well-argued after-dinner speech,
the other diners feel pity for the poor lunatic: ‘En los que escuchado le
habían sobrevino nueva lástima de ver que hombre que, al parecer tenía
buen entendimiento y buen discurso en todas las cosas que trataba, le
hubiese perdido tan rematadamente en tratándole de su negra y
pizmienta caballería’ [‘Those who’d been listening to him were again
moved to pity on seeing that a man who seemed to have a good brain,
and could argue clearly about everything he discussed, so totally lost
his senses as soon as the talk turned to his detestable and damnable
chivalry’].73 In Chapter 49, the canon of Toledo, too, marvels at the
mad-sane paradox: ‘[A]dmirábase de ver la estrañeza de su grande
locura, y de que en cuanto hablaba y respondía mostraba tener
bonísimo entendimiento; solamente venía a perder los estribos…en
tratándole de caballería’ [‘[W]ondering at this great, strange madness
of his, and at how he showed a fine understanding in all his remarks
and replies, only taking leave of his senses…when chivalry was the
subject under discussion’].74 But once the canon realizes that the poor
man is incapable of overcoming his obsession with chivalry, he is
‘movido de compasión’ [‘moved by pity’].75 This combination of
wonder and compassion felt by intelligent, well-educated characters
such as the priest, Cardenio, the diners at the inn, and the canon of
Toledo shows that to feel pity for the mad knight is not an
anachronistic modern response, as ‘hard’ critics like Auerbach would
have it, but rather one that came to form part of Cervantes’s evolving
intentions as he explored the potentialities of the knight’s madness.
Don Quixote’s authority and Sancho’s
latent power
There have been countless studies of Don Quixote and Sancho Panza
but few, if any, have attempted to analyse in a sustained and consistent
manner the full arc of their relationship over the entire course of the
novel. Instead, their relations tend to be treated as little more than a
string of discrete if not interchangeable episodes, with little sense of
progressive development. A partial exception was Salvador de
Madariaga, who sought to ‘free’ the pair ‘from the rigidity which has
simplified them with two antithetical and symmetrical characters’. But
Madariaga remained attached to a sentimental belief that the
protagonists were ‘united’ by a ‘fraternity of soul’, so he portrayed their
relationship as one of mutual influence: ‘While Sancho’s spirit rises
from reality to illusion, Don Quixote’s descends from illusion to reality’.
He memorably encapsulated this process as the ‘quixotification’ of
Sancho and the ‘sanchification’ of Don Quixote, a formula which
actually reveals that his rather schematic account of their character-
development hardly ‘freed’ the pair from the ‘antithetical symmetry’
that he believed had ‘simplified them’.76 Still, the sentimentalization of
either the knight or his squire, or both, is virtually ubiquitous in
Quixote criticism. Some critics regard Don Quixote as a benevolent
father-figure to Sancho but, conversely, even those critics who believe
that the whole point of the novel was the comic chastisement of the
deluded hidalgo tend to portray Sancho as a common-sense foil to his
crazy master. In my view, these readings disguise the real thrust of the
narrative and attenuate the far harsher comic vision that Cervantes
would create in Don Quixote, for the knight’s evolution towards paradox
and ambivalence would prompt in turn the evolution of Sancho Panza.
Over time, the squire’s character will reveal a paradoxical quality too,
in a blend of foolish-clever (tonto-listo) traits that will often mesh with
his master’s paradoxical madness and convert their relationship itself
into a new source of wonder and surprise.
The relationship between Don Quixote and Sancho Panza is
essentially transactional and political, a feudal pact between a lord who
offers favours in return for the services of a vassal. Thus, in Chapter 7
Don Quixote promises Sancho a noble title and an island to govern if he
will serve him as his squire, and the illiterate peasant agrees to leave
wife and children because he is keen to gain some material reward.
Nevertheless, Sancho is wary of the knight’s promises: he wonders
whether he might really become a king, his wife a queen, and his
children princes. ‘Pues ¿quién lo duda?’ [‘Who can doubt it?’], says Don
Quixote. ‘Yo lo dudo’ [‘I can’], replies Sancho.77 Sancho’s ‘yo lo dudo’
represents a source of power in relation to his master, for even though
he enters the sphere of the chivalric madness by agreeing to serve Don
Quixote, he is not wholly absorbed into that strange, quixotic space, he
remains torn between a desire to rise in the world and a suspicion that
the knight might be off his head. The awkwardness of being in such an
ambiguous position—half-in and half-out of the weird bubble of
quixotic madness—will stimulate Sancho’s native cunning when it
comes to advancing his own interests, though there are times when he
cannot help but admire his master, as in the adventure of the flocks of
sheep, and so a volatile blend of fondness and exasperation will
somehow keep master and servant together in a common quest for their
quite different goals.
Built as it is on such insecure foundations, the central relationship in
the novel becomes, in effect, a tacit contest between the master’s
formal authority and the servant’s covert self-interest. This contest first
emerges in the episode of the fulling mills (I.20). One dark night the
pair hear a tremendous din, which is so alarming that even Don
Quixote is scared, but he pulls himself together and prepares to face the
challenge, vaunting his prowess in a heroic speech. A terrified Sancho,
however, ties Rocinante’s hind legs and deceives the old hidalgo into
believing that his steed has been put under a spell. At daybreak, when
they discover that the terrible racket was caused by fulling mills, the
squire parodies the knight’s bravado by mimicking his speech of the
night before. Don Quixote is outraged: ‘Es menester hacer diferencia de
amo a mozo, de señor a criado y de caballero a escudero. Así que desde
hoy en adelante, nos hemos de tratar con más respeto’ [‘A distance
must be kept between master and man, between lord and lackey,
between knight and squire. So from now on we must behave with more
respect’].78 Sancho apologises: ‘Mas bien puede estar seguro que de
aquí adelante no despliegue mis labios para hacer donaire de las cosas
de vuestra merced, si no fuere para honrarle, como a mi amo y señor
natural’ [‘You can take it from me that from this moment on I won’t
open my mouth to make fun of your doings, but only to honour you as
my master and natural lord’].79 The term señor natural was employed to
describe the authority of a lord over his vassals, so if the squire’s
mockery of Don Quixote had been allowed to go unchecked, his
insubordination would have posed an overt challenge to the knight’s
authority, and the book could have taken a markedly different turn at
this point.
The immediate crisis may be over, the threat overcome—but only
for a time, because Sancho has had his first taste of power and it will
not be long before he is given the chance to savour it once more. In
Chapter 25, the knight unwittingly forces the squire to lie again when
he orders him to deliver a letter to Dulcinea in her village. Sancho
never actually goes to El Toboso, but on his return he assures his
master that he has visited Dulcinea and that she has accepted his love
(I.31). This wonderful news would explain why the knight is so
optimistic for the rest of Part I: his mission to restore the order of
chivalry appears to be succeeding, but in truth the rascally Sancho is
being even more manipulative than in the episode of the fulling mills,
relishing his recently discovered power to deceive by giving tantalizing
answers to his master’s excited questions about Dulcinea’s appearance
and conduct.
As we can see from this train of events, the underlying contest
between master and servant gives rise to a second narrative process in
the novel, involving Don Quixote, Sancho, and Dulcinea, a contest
which begins to acquire an inherent logic, though without detracting
from the chivalric parody as such. The next step after Sancho’s return
from his alleged visit to Dulcinea would have been for Don Quixote to
pay his respects to his lady in El Toboso, but the development of this
embryonic plot was cut short by Cervantes’s decision to expand his
narrative through the interpolation of a series of romantic tales. Hence
Don Quixote’s puzzling deferment of his visit to Dulcinea in order to
come to the aid of the Princess Micomicona, a determination that is
itself interrupted by the various interpolated tales and other goings-on
at the inn. In short, the progress of the central relationship was arrested
at a crucial juncture, breaking the thread of the emerging plot-line,
which would remain hanging for the rest of Part I.
In its contrasts between story and history, illusion and reality,
verisimilitude and the marvellous, the first part of Don Quixote is very
much a product of its time, but Cervantes’s invención has already
produced innovations we can now recognize as major features of
modern fiction. Given the knight’s fantasies, the narrative observes a
basically realist aesthetic, but the dialectic between illusion and reality
generates an interplay of perspectives between the characters which at
times gives an impression of relativism. In a ground-breaking
development, the ingenious, paradoxical madness of the crazy knight
replaces the fantasies of the books of chivalry as the principal source of
admiratio, an innovation which facilitates a shift of interest to the
characters of Don Quixote and Sancho as they begin to evolve from the
stock types of braggart knight and crude rustic into more complex
personalities whose relationship acquires a dynamic of its own, which
tends to dissolve aesthetic and social hierarchies. Finally, there is the
ironic game that Cervantes plays with his reader in a variety of ways:
the tongue-in-cheek tone he affects from the start, the narrative masks
he adopts in the telling of Quixote’s story, and not least, his invention
of the unreliable narrator in the guise of Cide Hamete Benengeli, even
though he has not yet appreciated its full potential.
The Prologue to Part I
When he came to write the Prologue, Cervantes gave his prospective
reader a foretaste of the ironic game he had invented in the course of
writing Don Quixote.80 A breezy, teasing irony pervades the entire
piece. He asks to be forgiven for the faults in the work, and invites the
reader to consider himself absolutely free to judge its worth:
[T]ienes tu alma en tu cuerpo, y tu libre albedrío como el más pintado,
y estás en tu casa, donde eres señor della, como el rey de sus alcabalas,
y sabes lo que comúnmente se dice, que ‘debajo de mi manto al rey
mato’, todo lo cual te esenta y hace libre de todo respeto y obligación,
y, así, puedes decir de la historia todo aquello que te pareciere.
[[Y]ou have your own soul in your own body, and your own free will
like anybody else, and you are sitting in your own home, where you are
the lord and master, as much as the king is of his taxes, and you know
that common saying: ‘Under my cloak, a fig for the king’. All of which
exempts and frees you from every respect and obligation, and so you
can say whatever you like about this history.]81
The traditional hierarchy of literary relations is inverted here—the
reader is king, and the author must submit his work to this sovereign
judge. But there would appear to be a sting in the tail of this self-
effacing modesty, for no sooner does Cervantes invest the reader with
the authority of a king than he cites the well-known saying, ‘debajo de
mi manto al rey mato’, a literal translation of which would be: ‘under
my cloak I can kill the king’. The immediate proximity of this regicidal
adage to Cervantes’s flattering elevation of the reader to king-like
status carries a suggestion that the reader may well have the authority
to say whatever he likes about the work, but the author is still capable
of ‘killing the king’ by overturning the reader’s expectations ‘under the
cloak’ of the text itself.
Cervantes pursues this ironic game with the reader by inventing a
‘friend’ who chides him for his anxiety about his lack of authority,
telling him there is no need to preface the work with sonnets by
important people like dukes, marquises, counts, bishops, ladies, or
famous poets; nor to go begging maxims from philosophers, counsels
from Holy Scripture, fables from poets, clauses from rhetoricians, or
miracles from saints; nor should he try to puff up his authority by
filling his book with marginalia or endnotes. He should just aim to
‘deshacer la autoridad y cabida que en el mundo y en el vulgo tienen
los libros de caballerías’ [to ‘destroy the authority and influence that
the books of chivalry enjoy in the world and among the general
public’].82 Cervantes’s cynical ‘friend’ is mocking the practice of
invoking various forms of extraneous authority—religious, secular, or
aesthetic—as guarantors of a book’s worth, but he does so in order to
assert the author’s freedom to pursue his own creative ends. His writing
should express ‘en todo lo que alcanzárades y fuere posible vuestra
intención, dando a entender vuestros conceptos sin intrincarlos ni
oscurecerlos’ [express ‘what is in your mind to the very best of your
ability, setting out your ideas without complicating or obscuring
them’].83 He should endeavour to make his readers laugh as well as
marvel at his powers of invention:
Procurad también que, leyendo vuestra historia, el melancólico se
mueva a risa, el risueño la acreciente, el simple no se enfade, el discreto
se admire de la invención, el grave no la desprecie, ni el prudente deje de
alabarla.
[You should try to ensure that the melancholy man is moved to laughter
when he reads your history, the jovial man laughs even more, the
simpleton is not discouraged, the judicious marvel at its inventiveness, the
serious-minded do not scorn it nor the wise fail to praise it.]84
But Cervantes’s parody of the libros de caballerías raised more profound
questions about literary authority. What was the value of the creative
imagination? Could it be justified on its own terms alone? After all, if
the principal target of the parody was the disguising of fiction as
‘history’ in the Spanish romances of chivalry, then it behoved Cervantes
to defend the intrinsic authority of fiction itself.
The ironic strategy of ‘killing the king’ was carried over into the
Novelas ejemplares. Once again, Cervantes presents himself in the
Prologue as an author bereft of authority: he is ‘blank and faceless’ [‘he
quedado en blanco y sin figura’] because he has no way of validating
his credentials, so he will have to speak for himself (‘será forzoso
valerme por mi pico’), even though his voice is hindered by a stammer
that obliges him to resort to signals to convey his ‘truths’ (‘aunque
tartamudo, no lo será para decir verdades, que dichas por señas, suelen
ser entendidas’). This strange evasiveness was, of course, a pose
designed to challenge the belief that literature could only be justified if
it conveyed moral lessons or religious doctrine. The author should not
be a preacher, Cervantes goes on to say, he must come down from the
pulpit and go out into the public square, where he should present his
fiction as a kind of contest, specifically a ‘game of billiards’ [‘una mesa
de trucos’], which anyone is welcome to play without fear of harm, for
each and every one of the twelve novellas in the collection, he insists,
contains a moral example—but it is up to readers to find it for
themselves. He concludes by stating that his Novelas ejemplares contain
‘un misterio escondido que las levanta’, a ‘hidden mystery’ that
‘elevates them’—but above what exactly? He does not say, though he
may perhaps have meant misterio in the sense of the ‘mystery’ or skill-
set of a trade or craft, thereby suggesting that the craft of fiction was
capable in and of itself to ‘enseñar y deleitar juntamente’ [‘to instruct
and delight at one and the same time’] and so could achieve its own
autonomous authority and value.85
The prologues to Don Quixote Part I and to the Novelas ejemplares
celebrate fiction as a self-sufficient game between author and reader,
and indeed, this ironic game of ‘killing’ the king-like reader would
provide the impetus to launch the sequel to Don Quixote in 1615. For
by linking two of the discoveries he had made in Part I—namely, the
pathos of the knight’s madness and Sancho’s talent for deceit—
Cervantes would spring an extraordinary surprise upon the reader, a
surprise capable of generating what Borges once called ‘el poder
mágico insondable de la Segunda Parte’ [‘the unfathomable magic
power of Part Two’].86
Acknowledgement
My work for this chapter was sponsored by a Leverhulme Trust Major Research
Fellowship and a Cátedra de Excelencia, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid.
Works Cited
Allen, John J. Don Quijote: Hero or Fool? Part 2 (Gainesville, Florida: University
of Florida Press, 1979).
Aristotle. On the Art of Poetry. In Classical Literary Criticism (Harmondsworth:
Penguin, 1965).
Auerbach, Erich. ‘The Enchanted Dulcinea’. In Mimesis: The Representation of
Reality in Western Literature, translated by Willard R. Trask (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1974 [1946]), pp. 334–58.
Bloom, Harold. ‘Introduction’ to Don Quixote, translated by Edith Grossman
(New York: Ecco/HarperCollins, 2003), p. xxii.
Brenan, Gerald. ‘Cervantes’. In Cervantes: A Collection of Critical Essays, edited by
Lowry Nelson, Jr. (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1969), pp. 13–33.
Castro, Américo. El pensamiento de Cervantes (Barcelona-Madrid: Noguer, 1972
[1925]).
Castro, Américo. Hacia Cervantes (Madrid: Taurus, 1967).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Don Quijote de la Mancha. Edición del Instituto Cervantes
1605–2005, dirigida por Francisco Rico (Barcelona: Galaxia Gutenberg.
Círculo de Lectores. Centro Para la Edición de los Clásicos Españoles, 2014).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Don Quixote, translated, Introduction and Notes by John
Rutherford (London: Penguin Books, 2003).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Novelas ejemplares, edited by Jorge García López (Madrid:
Real Academia Española, 2013).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Viaje del Parnaso y poesías sueltas, edited by José Montero
Reguera and Fernando Romo Feito (Madrid: Real Academia Española, 2016).
Close, Anthony. The Romantic Approach to Don Quixote (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1978).
Durán, Manuel. La ambigüedad en el Quijote (Xalapa: Universidad Veracruzana,
1960).
Egido, Aurora. ‘El gusto de Don Quijote y el placer del autor y de los lectores’.
In Por el gusto de leer a Cervantes (Sevilla: Fundación José Manuel Lara, 2018),
pp. 61–95.
Eisenberg, Daniel. Romances of Chivalry in the Spanish Golden Age (Newark,
Delaware: Juan de la Cuesta Hispanic Monographs, 1982).
Flores, R.M. ‘Cervantes at Work: The Writing of Don Quixote, Part I’. Journal of
Hispanic Philology 3 (1979): pp. 135–60.
Flores, R.M. ‘The Role of Cide Hamete in Don Quixote’. Bulletin of Hispanic
Studies 59 (1982): pp. 3–14.
Forcione, Alban K. Cervantes, Aristotle and the ‘Persiles’ (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1970).
Gasió, Guillermo. Borges en Japón: Japón en Borges (Buenos Aires: Editorial
Universitaria de Buenos Aires, 1988).
González Echevarría, Roberto. ‘La improvisación en la génesis y estructura del
Quijote’. In El estrellado establo: infinito e improvisación en el Siglo de Oro
(Madrid: Cátedra, 2019), pp. 29–73.
Herrero, Javier. ‘Arcadia’s Inferno: Cervantes’s Attack on Pastoral’. Bulletin of
Hispanic Studies 55 (1978): pp. 289–99.
Herrero, Javier. ‘Dulcinea and Her Critics’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes
Society of America 2 (1982): pp. 23–42.
Immerwahr, Raymond. ‘Structural Symmetry in the Episodic Narratives of Don
Quijote, Part One’. Comparative Literature 10 (1958): pp. 121–33.
Kundera, Milan. ‘Afterword’. In The Book of Laughter and Forgetting
(Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1983).
Lukács, Georg. The Theory of the Novel (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1971).
Madariaga, Salvador de. Don Quixote. An Introductory Essay in Psychology
(London: Oxford University Press, 1966 [1935]).
Mancing, Howard. ‘Cide Hamete Benengeli vs. Miguel de Cervantes: The
Metafictional Dialectic of Don Quijote’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes
Society of America 1 (1981): pp. 63–81.
Mandel, Oscar. ‘The Function of the Norm in Don Quixote’. Modern Philology 55
(1957): pp. 154–63.
Martínez Mata, Emilio. Cervantes comenta el Quijote (Madrid: Cátedra, 2008).
Martínez Mata, Emilio. ‘El Quijote en el nacimiento de la novela moderna: la
interpretación satírica’. In Recepción e interpretación del Quijote, edited by
Emilio Martínez Mata and Pablo José Carvajal Pedraza (Madrid: Visor, 2019),
pp. 61–77.
Martín Morán, José Manuel. ‘Ejemplaridad y retórica del silencio en el prólogo
de las Novelas Ejemplares’. Boletín de la Biblioteca de Menéndez Pelayo 92
(2016): pp. 301–10.
Martín Morán, José Manuel. El Quijote en ciernes (Torino: Edizioni del Orso,
1990).
Predmore, Richard L. The World of Don Quixote (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1967).
Quint, David. Cervantes’s Novel of Modern Times: A New Reading of ‘Don Quijote’.
(Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press, 2003).
Riley, E.C. Cervantes’s Theory of the Novel (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1962).
Riley, E.C. Don Quixote (London: Allen and Unwin, 1986).
Riley, E.C. ‘Three Versions of Don Quixote’. The Modern Language Review 68
(1973): pp. 807–19.
Rivero Iglesias, Carmen. La recepción e interpretación del Quijote en la Alemania
del siglo XVIII (Ciudad Real: Ayuntamiento de Argamasilla de Alba, 2010).
Russell, P.E. ‘Don Quixote as a Funny Book’. The Modern Language Review 64
(1969): pp. 312–26.
Spitzer, Leo. ‘Linguistic Perspectivism in the Don Quijote’. In Linguistics and
Literary History (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2015 [1948]), pp.
41–86.
Stagg, Geoffrey. ‘Revision in Don Quixote Part I’. In Studies in Honour of I.
González Llubera, edited by Frank Pierce (Oxford: Dolphin, 1959), pp. 347–66.
Trilling, Lionel. ‘Manners, Morals and the Novel’. In The Liberal Imagination
(London: Mercury Books, 1961), pp. 205–22.
Unamuno, Miguel de. Vida de don Quijote y Sancho (Madrid: Cátedra, 2004
[1905]).
Van Doren, Mark. Don Quixote’s Profession (New York: Columbia University
Press, 1958).
Weinberg, Bernard. A History of Literary Criticism in the Italian Renaissance
(Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1961).
Williamson, Edwin. Commentaries on Part I, Chapters 18–20. In ‘Lecturas del
Quijote’. Don Quijote de la Mancha. Edición del Instituto Cervantes, 2014 (see
above). Volumen complementario, pp. 54–5.
Williamson, Edwin. ‘El “misterio escondido” en El celoso extremeño: Una
aproximación al arte de Cervantes’. Nueva Revista de Filología Hispánica 38
(1990): pp. 793–815.
Williamson, Edwin. ‘Intención and Invención in the Quixote’. Cervantes: Bulletin of
the Cervantes Society of America 8 (1988): pp. 7–22.
Williamson, Edwin. ‘Romance and Realism in the Interpolated Stories of the
Quixote’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 2 (1982): pp.
43–67.
Williamson, Edwin. ‘The Devil in Don Quixote’. Bulletin of Spanish Studies 92
(2015): pp. 147–66.
Williamson, Edwin. The Half-Way House of Fiction: Don Quixote and Arthurian
Romance (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984).
Williamson, Edwin. ‘The Power-Struggle between Don Quixote and Sancho:
Four Crises in the Development of the Narrative’. Bulletin of Spanish Studies 84
(2007): pp. 837–58.
1 Lukács, p. 103.
2 Trilling, p. 209.
3 Bloom, ‘Introduction’. p. xxii.
4 ‘Don Quixote gets authors’ votes’, BBC News, 7 May 2002.
5 See Williamson, The Half-Way House…, pp. 1–28, on the art of Chrétien de
Troyes.
6 See Williamson, The Half-Way House…, pp. 29–69, and Eisenberg.
7 See Russell.
8 See Martínez Mata, ‘El cambio de interpretación…’.
9 For the interpretation of Don Quixote in Germany, see Rivero Iglesias.
10 See, for example, Castro, Hacia Cervantes, p. 322.
11 Van Doren was the first to propose explicitly that the knight was ‘play-
acting’.
12 Auerbach, p. 347.
13 Auerbach, p. 343. See also Close.
14 See Mandel, ‘The Function of the Norm…’.
15 Auerbach, pp. 343–4.
16 Cervantes, Viaje del Parnaso, IV.28–9, p. 61.
17 See Williamson, ‘Intención and Invención…’.
18 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.1, p. 43 (my emphasis).
19 Cervantes, Don Quixote, I.1, p. 27 (my emphasis). Unless otherwise
indicated, all translations from Don Quixote come from this edition.
20 See González Echevarría on improvisation (pp. 29–73).
21 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.1, p. 45; my translation.
22 Kundera, p. 237.
23 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.2, p. 52; p. 32. See Predmore, Chapters 4 and 5,
for a classic study of ‘the problem of reality in Don Quixote’ (p. 53).
24 See Flores, ‘Cervantes at Work…’, pp. 139–41, and Stagg.
25 Flores, ‘The Role of…’, p. 4.
26 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.8, p. 113; p. 70.
27 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.9, p. 119; p. 75.
28 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.9, p. 120; p. 76.
29 See Williamson, The Half-Way…, pp. 50–69.
30 See Allen, pp. 3–15, Mancing, and Riley, ‘Three Versions…’.
31 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.25, pp. 303–4; p. 209.
32 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.25, p. 304; p. 209.
33 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.44, p. 570; p. 418.
34 See Castro, El pensamiento…, p. 83; see also Spitzer, Durán, pp. 184–210,
and Predmore, pp. 53–83.
35 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.16, p. 190; p. 127.
36 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.44, p. 1070; p. 776.
37 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.44, p. 1070; p. 776.
38 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.44, p. 1070; p. 776.
39 See Stagg, Flores, ‘Cervantes at Work’, and Martín Morán, El Quijote en
ciernes, pp. 23–105.
40 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.11, p. 135; p. 85.
41 Cervantes, Don Quixote I.12, p. 93
42 Cervantes, Don Quixote I.14, p. 112; see also Flores, ‘Cervantes at Work’,
pp. 147–8.
43 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.28, p. 347; p. 247.
44 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.35, p. 463; p. 337.
45 Immerwahr, p. 129.
46 See Williamson, ‘Romance and Realism…’ and ‘The Devil in Don Quixote’.
Quint, pp. 3–90, regards the ‘interlacing’ of tales and episodes as the
fundamental narrative principle in Part I.
47 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.42, p. 146–7; p. 400.
48 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.44, p. 567; p. 416.
49 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.45, p. 572; p. 420.
50 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.45, p. 575; p. 422.
51 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.45, p. 575; p. 422.
52 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.45, p. 577 (my emphasis); p. 422.
53 See Immerwahr, p. 134 and Herrero, p. 294.
54 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.51, p. 636; p. 466.
55 Weinberg, pp. 797–813.
56 See Riley, Cervantes’s Theory…, pp. 88–94.
57 For fuller discussions of these issues, see Riley, Cervantes’s Theory…, and
Forcione.
58 Riley, Cervantes’s Theory…, shows how Cervantes was on the whole
tentative and exploratory in his treatment of theoretical issues.
59 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.49, p. 616; p. 452.
60 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.49, p. 618; p. 453.
61 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.50, p. 623; p. 453.
62 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.50, p. 623; p. 453.
63 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.50, p. 625 (my emphasis); p. 458.
64 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.50, p. 625; p. 458.
65 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.4, p. 74; p. 46.
66 Brenan, p. 19.
67 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.18, p. 210; p. 140.
68 See Williamson, ‘Lecturas del Quijote’, p. 55.
69 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.26, p. 322 (my emphasis); p. 224.
70 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.30, p. 390; p. 279.
71 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.30, p. 390; p. 279.
72 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.30, p. 390; p. 279.
73 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.38, p. 491–2 (my emphasis); p. 359.
74 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.49, p. 615; p. 451.
75 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.49, p. 615; p. 451.
76 Madariaga, pp. 137, 136, and 145, respectively.
77 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.7, p. 102; p. 63.
78 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.20, p. 242; p. 164.
79 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.20, p. 243; p. 165.
80 See Williamson, The Half-Way House…, pp. 82–90.
81 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.Prólogo, p. 10; p. 11–12.
82 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.Prólogo, p. 19; p. 16.
83 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.Prólogo, p. 19; p. 16.
84 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.Prólogo, p. 19 (my emphasis); p. 16. For the
wider implications of this passage, see Williamson, The Half-Way House…, pp.
86–8, and Martínez Mata, Cervantes comenta…, pp. 75–81.
85 Misterio was derived from both mysterium and ministerium in Latin. See
Williamson, ‘El “misterio escondido”…’, pp. 812–15 and p. 813, note 21. For
Cervantes’s evasiveness in this prologue, see Martín Morán, ‘Ejemplaridad y
retórica del silencio…’. On pleasure and profit, see Riley, Cervantes’s Theory…,
pp. 81–8, and Egido, pp. 61–95, who argues that Cervantes advocates ‘esa
autonomía del gusto que es patrimonio de la modernidad’ (p. 95).
86 Gasió, p. 92.
Chapter 6
Don Quixote, Part II (1615)
Edwin Williamson
University of Oxford
The first part of Don Quixote soon met with great success in the
Spanish-speaking world. Within a few months of its publication in early
January 1605, people were dressing up as the mad knight and his
squire in fiestas and street-pageants in Spain, and by 1607 the odd
couple had reached the Vice-Royalty of Peru, appearing as figures of
fun at a fiesta in Lima and even in towns in the Andes. The book’s fame
began to spread abroad too. The Bodleian Library at Oxford acquired a
copy of the first edition in 1605; Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher
based a play, The Coxcomb, written between 1608 and 1610, on El
curioso impertinente, one of the tales interpolated in the novel; the first
English translation by Thomas Shelton appeared in 1612, and another
interpolated tale, the story of Cardenio and Luscinda, inspired a play,
The History of Cardenio, now lost, whose authorship has been attributed
to Fletcher in collaboration with William Shakespeare and which is
recorded as having been performed in London in 1613 by the King’s
Men, Shakespeare’s theatre company. El curioso impertinente was
translated into French in 1608, and a French version of the whole of
Part I was published in 1614.
Cervantes was immensely proud of the fame Part I had so rapidly
achieved. In the dedication to the Count of Lemos of Part II, licensed
for publication on 30 March 1615, he claimed to have received a letter
from the ‘Emperor of China’, no less, ‘pidiéndome o por mejor decir
suplicándome’1 [‘requesting, nay, begging me’] for a copy of his book.2
This ‘great’ Emperor wished to establish an academy of the Spanish
language in China, with Don Quixote as the principal text and Cervantes
as its rector. Such an improbable story was very likely a self-
congratulatory fantasy designed as much to spite his literary rivals as to
impress his noble patron, but Cervantes’s pride in the success of Part I
inspired him to create some striking connections between the two parts,
the most original and ingenious being the introduction of new
characters in the sequel who have read Part I and who intervene in the
action to shape the destinies of knight and squire in Part II.3 One such
is Sansón Carrasco, a recent graduate of Salamanca, who appears in
Chapter 3 and informs the pair of the existence of a famous book
relating their adventures. Don Quixote is gratified by the news, having
assumed from the outset that there would be a sage enchanter
recording his exploits for posterity.4 Sancho’s delight at his unexpected
celebrity rekindles his ambition to be rewarded for his services with an
island and a noble title; he therefore urges his master to resume his
adventures. In later chapters the pair will meet a Duke and Duchess,
also readers of Part I, whose hoaxes will upset and eventually disrupt
their relationship, while a subsequent intervention by Sansón Carrasco
will trigger the denouement of the novel.
On his previous sallies, Don Quixote had transformed everyday
things into chivalric fantasies—inns into castles, windmills into giants,
and so on—but in Part II he tends to see reality as it appears, and the
fact that Don Quixote takes more notice of the everyday world allowed
Cervantes to depict more of the social reality of contemporary Spain:
knight and squire are invited to people’s houses, attend a wedding, stay
at a duke’s castle, come across Catalan bandits, and visit the city of
Barcelona, all of which provide opportunities for social observation and
critique. In Part II, there are fewer direct transformations of reality
because the mad knight is mostly taken in by pseudo-chivalric episodes
invented by other characters. This has led to a fairly common view that
the knight’s madness decreases in the sequel,5 but in fact he is still
capable of projecting his fantasies onto the real world, as in the case of
the water-mills that he takes for a castle in the adventure on the River
Ebro (II. 29), and, conversely, he is deceived by pseudo-chivalric
hoaxes in Part I, notably the extensive charade involving the Princess
Micomicona. When it comes to matters of chivalry, Don Quixote is as
much a lunatic as ever he was in Part I, which is not surprising given
that the parody of the chivalry books constitutes the basic rationale of
the entire novel. Still, there is a very good reason, as we shall presently
see, why in the second part the knight will approach ordinary
phenomena with more caution.
There are two major differences between the Quixotes of 1605 and
1615, both arising organically from Cervantes’s previous innovations
and both showing a keen understanding of the potentialities of these
inventions. In the first place, Cervantes’s equivocation over the ‘truth’
of Don Quixote’s story is more fully and distinctly promoted in Part II.
When Don Quixote is informed about the existence of a famous book
relating his exploits he is somewhat irked that his chronicler should be
an infidel Moor, and he discusses with Sansón Carrasco the
responsibilities of historians to tell the truth. This is the fundamental
issue at stake in the novel, of course, but now Cervantes has found a
way of focusing on it more sharply by enlarging the role of Cide
Hamete Benengeli as the unreliable narrator of the text. The Arab
‘historian’ is mentioned by name thirty-nine times in Part II, whereas in
the first part his name appears only five times.6 In Part II, then, the
metafictional play is greatly increased and more clearly distributed
between three distinct roles: Cide Hamete is consistently acknowledged
as the ‘primer autor’ (‘first author’) of the text, whose omniscience and
veracity are periodically remarked upon and sometimes questioned by
Cervantes himself, the ‘segundo autor’ (‘second author’), who also
reports the occasional observations on the accuracy of Cide Hamete’s
chronicle by the ‘traductor’, the translator of the Arabic original into
Spanish.7
The second important difference can be attributed to a pivotal crisis,
which will transform the novel in several respects, and which reveals
Cervantes’s far more assured grasp of his material. In Chapter 44, Cide
Hamete (acting as a spokesman for Cervantes on this occasion) says
that, unlike in Part I, he will avoid inserting extraneous tales, other
than a few episodes ‘nacidos…de los mesmos sucesos que la verdad
ofrece’ [‘developing…out of the events of the true history itself’].8
Thus, when he came to write the sequel, Cervantes took up the broken
thread of the Quixote-Sancho storyline that he had left hanging in
I.31,9 and invented an episode that would take his novel into uncharted
territory. In II.10, Don Quixote arrives in El Toboso to pay his respects
to the ‘princess’ Dulcinea in her ‘palace’. This visit refers back to I.25,
when the knight had ordered his squire to deliver a letter to the lady of
his heart. Sancho had been amazed to learn that this so-called princess
was none other than Aldonza Lorenzo, a good-looking girl from a
neighbouring village, with whom the old hidalgo claimed to have been
in love before setting off on his adventures. Although Sancho never did
go to El Toboso, he reported to his master in I.31 that he had delivered
his letter to Dulcinea and that she had accepted his declaration of love.
However, Don Quixote, surprisingly, decided to go to the aid of the
distressed Princess Micomicona before visiting his ladylove Dulcinea at
El Toboso.
Given this back-story, when in Part II knight and squire arrive in El
Toboso, Sancho finds himself in a dreadful bind, having lied to his
master about his earlier audience with the lady. It then occurs to the
squire to deceive his master once more by fooling him into believing
that the first girl they may happen to come across is the lady Dulcinea.
Sancho is quite cynical about this deception: ‘[C]uando él no lo crea,
juraré yo, y si él jurare, tornaré yo a jurar, y si porfiare, porfiaré yo
más, y de manera que tengo de tener la mía siempre sobre el hito,
venga lo que viniere’ [‘[I]f he doesn’t believe it I’ll swear she is, and if
he insists I’ll insist even more, and so I’ll make sure that I always have
the last word, come what may’].10 And so, when they catch sight of
three peasant girls riding by, Sancho declares them to be none other
than Dulcinea and her maidservants. Don Quixote, however, can only
see three peasant girls on donkeys, so Sancho launches into an effusive
description of Dulcinea’s beauty and bejewelled finery, which leads the
puzzled knight to conclude that an enchanter must have cast a spell on
the lady in order to prevent him from perceiving her in her true glory.
He curses the evil wizard who has ‘puesto nubes y cataratas en mis
ojos’ [‘placed clouds and cataracts over my eyes’]:11
—¡Y que no viese yo todo eso, Sancho!—dijo don Quijote—. Ahora
torno a decir y diré mil veces que soy el más desdichado de los
hombres.
[‘And to think I could not see any of that, Sancho! I say it again, and I
shall say it a thousand times: I am the most unfortunate of men.’]12
Cervantes adds to the poignancy of the scene by revealing a new streak
of cruelty in Sancho through the sheer cynicism with which he fools his
master:
—¡Santo Dios! ¿Qué es lo que dices, Sancho amigo?—dijo don Quijote
—. Mira no me engañes, ni quieras con falsas alegrías alegrar mis
verdaderas tristezas.
—¿Que sacaría yo de engañar a vuesa merced – respondió Sancho—, y
más estando tan cerca de descubrir mi verdad?
[‘Good God! What are you saying, friend Sancho?,’ said Don Quixote.
‘You had better not be deceiving me, or attempting to beguile my real
grief with false joy.’
‘What would I gain from deceiving you?’ Sancho replied, ‘especially
now I’m so close to showing you the truth of what I’m saying.’]13
The squire is greatly amused by the knight’s gullibility: ‘Harto tenía que
hacer el socarrón de Sancho en disimular la risa, oyendo las sandeces
de su amo, tan delicadamente engañado’ [The sly rogue Sancho had his
work cut out to hide his laughter as he listened to the nonsense being
blurted by his master, whom he had deceived with such finesse].14
The supposed enchantment of Dulcinea constitutes the central crisis
of the novel, a turning-point that will transform the character of each
of the protagonists as well as the nature of their relationship, and
whose consequences will be ingeniously unfolded by Cervantes over the
entire course of Part II.15 To begin with, the roles of knight and squire
appear to have been reversed in this scene—Sancho claims to see
reality in its chivalric aspect whereas Don Quixote appears to have lost
the gift of chivalric insight, which had impelled him to adventure
throughout Part I. This ‘blindness’ explains why he will no longer so
readily transform everyday phenomena: not because he has become less
mad, but because the alleged ‘enchantment’ of Dulcinea has shaken his
confidence in his ability to interpret the world around him in a
chivalric sense, and this, logically, will make him far less impulsive
than in Part I. The fact is that Sancho’s lie threatens the very heart of
his enterprise. The would-be hero had come to El Toboso expecting to
see Aldonza Lorenzo gloriously transformed into her true chivalric self
as the princess Dulcinea—which was how Sancho claimed to have seen
her on his previous alleged visit—but he is faced instead with an ugly,
foul-smelling, bad-mouthed rustic on a donkey, a horribly uncouth
avatar of the comely Aldonza. This shock throws into doubt all his
efforts to restore the world of chivalry, and therefore undermines his
confidence in his knightly destiny.
Erich Auerbach believed that the travesty of Dulcinea ‘holds a
special place’ among the knight’s adventures: ‘This is the climax of his
illusion and disillusionment.’16 Her enchantment, he went on to
observe, might have caused ‘a terrible crisis…It could produce a shock
which in turn could bring on much deeper insanity’, or else ‘a cure, an
instantaneous liberation from his idée fixe’, but even though ‘the
possibility of a shift into the tragic and problematic’ existed, he argued
that ‘such a shift is definitely avoided’ because the fact that the knight
‘automatically takes refuge in the interpretation that Dulcinea is under
enchantment, excludes everything tragic’.17 Don Quixote, therefore,
‘surmounts the shock’ so that even though the episode may seem ‘sad,
bitter, and almost tragic…if we merely read Cervantes’s text, we have a
farce, and a farce which is overwhelmingly comic’.18 Don Quixote,
however, does not ‘surmount the shock’; the enchantment of Dulcinea
does, in fact, produce a ‘terrible crisis’—but within the hermetic bubble of
the knight’s madness. And within that eccentric space there does indeed
occur ‘a shift into the tragic and problematic’, for, in the episode of the
‘enchanting’ of Dulcinea, Cervantes combined two crucial inventions of
Part I: namely, Sancho’s power to deceive his master and the pathos of
Don Quixote’s madness; and so, in a single, astonishing stroke of
genius, he overcame the narrative impasse that would otherwise have
resulted from having the mad knight visit El Toboso fully expecting to
see the non-existent Dulcinea.
Erich Auerbach gave very cursory and patchy attention to anything
that preceded or followed the enchanting of Dulcinea and therefore
failed to perceive the dynamic continuities that actually underlie the
episodic structure of the narrative. But the fact is that in this one
pivotal scene Cervantes brilliantly entwined the destinies of Don
Quixote, Sancho, and Dulcinea such as to produce a unifying plotline
running through the subsequent episodes of the novel. It was thanks
precisely to this crisis that Cervantes’s narrative acquired the organic
necessity identified by Aristotle as making for a ‘complex’ action.19 Let
us recall that Don Quixote’s decision to visit El Toboso was a
consequence of his squire’s earlier lie about his meeting with Dulcinea.
The mad knight was therefore expecting to ‘ver en su ser a mi señora’
[‘[behold] my lady in her true being’],20 but was faced instead with a
repellent rustic wench. As a result of this anagnorisis, or unexpected
discovery, the knight’s invincible optimism in Part I is replaced by
deepening misery:
Pensativo además iba don Quijote por su camino adelante,
considerando la mala burla que le habían hecho los encantadores
volviendo a su señora Dulcinea en la mala figura de la aldeana, y no
imaginaba qué remedio tendría para volverla a su ser primero; y estos
pensamientos le llevaban tan fuera de sí, que sin sentirlo soltó las
riendas a Rocinante, el cual sintiendo la libertad que se le daba, a cada
paso se detenía a pacer la verde yerba de que aquellos campos
abundaban.
[Don Quixote was plunged into dejected thought as he went on his way,
considering the bad joke that the enchanters had played on him by
turning his lady Dulcinea into the vile shape of a peasant wench, and he
couldn’t imagine what could be done to turn her back into herself; and
he was so carried away by these thoughts that, not knowing what he
was doing, he dropped the reins, and Rocinante made the most of the
liberty he was being given to stop at every step to munch the green
grass that was plentiful in those fields].21
Not only does Cervantes show him sunk in gloom immediately after his
discovery of Dulcinea’s degraded appearance, but he will also remind
the reader of Don Quixote’s melancholy in numerous chapters of Part
II.
The ‘enchantment’ of Dulcinea, then, makes the knight’s madness
appear to be a form of hamartia, a great involuntary error or flaw,
which will increasingly cause him to suffer as a result of his strange
blindness to the way things are. The evil spell apparently cast on his
lady brings about a peripeteia, a reversal of fortune, creating something
approaching a tragic crisis in the career of the mad knight—but not
fully. The narrative cannot develop into a proper tragic action because
Don Quixote remains as mad in Part II as he was in the first part, for
however much he may be plagued by doubts about his destiny,
however much he may suffer, the sheer inflexibility of his primary
madness will prevent him from questioning the fundamental belief that
the books of chivalry are absolutely true. Don Quixote, in short,
becomes the helpless victim of his madness, but although the reader
might therefore feel pity for the deluded wretch, as did some of the
characters in Part I, much of what he says and does will be just as
ridiculous as before, so fear, the other classic tragic emotion, cannot
arise at all. And yet, this very impediment, this unavoidable limitation,
would once more call forth the striking originality of Cervantes’s
imagination in his creation of a partially tragic action within the comic
envelope of the chivalric madness.22 Note in the passage cited above
how the pathos of the depressed Don Quixote unexpectedly slips into
bathos when Rocinante casually begins to ‘munch the green grass’.
With such quicksilver shifts from pity to mockery and vice-versa,
Cervantes would enrich and complicate his ironic game of ‘killing’ the
king-like reader ‘under the cloak’ of the text,23 thereby fashioning the
knight’s paradoxical madness into a literary phenomenon that would
come to resonate so powerfully with modern readers.
* * *
Sancho’s lie about Dulcinea’s condition produces a shift of power from
master to servant, for the success of this fabrication shows not only that
he can manipulate the knight’s madness but also that he could
grievously, if not fatally, damage his master’s chivalric illusions if he so
wished, either by owning up to having deceived him or by simply
abandoning him and going home. So, why does he remain in Quixote’s
service? His motives are mixed: he claims to love his master for his
sheer goodness of heart, but confesses also that he is tempted by the
Devil:
—[E]l diablo me pone ante los ojos aquí, allí, acá no, sino acullá, un
talego lleno de doblones, que me parece que a cada paso le toco con la
mano y me abrazo con él y lo llevo a mi casa, y echo censos y fundo
rentas y vivo como un príncipe.
[‘(T)he devil keeps dangling a bag full of doubloons in front of my eyes
here and there and everywhere, and with every step I take I seem to be
touching it and clutching it to my breast and taking it home and buying
property to lease and rent out and live like a king’]24
The prospect of making money and living a princely life makes Sancho
hedge his bets, half-believing still that Don Quixote might eventually
deliver the island he had been promised when they first set out on their
adventures. The squire may be an endearing rustic but he can also be a
cunning and self-interested rogue. What binds the pair now is a
perverse web of competing interests. If Don Quixote is to succeed in his
mission, he must free Dulcinea from her spell; Sancho, on the other
hand, knows that this ‘disenchantment’ can never happen, because the
whole thing is based on a lie of his own making; and yet, if he is to
fulfil his material aspirations, he must prevent his master from
discovering the true cause of his unhappiness. In the strange bubble
created by Don Quixote’s madness, we find conflict as well as affection,
self-interested manipulation as well as respect, but at bottom master
and servant are locked in a state of mutual dependency in which both
are doomed to the frustration of their respective desires. This fruitless
contest between the knight’s ostensible authority and the squire’s
material ambition will become, in due course, a prism through which
Cervantes will presage the crumbling of the principle of hierarchy that
underpinned the social order of his age.25
As Don Quixote succumbs to melancholy and self-doubt, there
follow a number of episodes that hint at the inner turmoil of the
stricken knight. In Chapter 11, they meet a company of actors in
costume mounted on a cart. Cupid is lying at the feet of the figure of
Death, next to whom are an angel with large, painted wings and an
emperor with a golden crown; there is also a knight bearing arms yet
wearing a plumed hat, which gives him the strangely foppish air of a
courtier instead of a proper warrior. Taken together, these actors may
be said to form a semi-allegorical tableau that externalizes Don
Quixote’s worst fears inasmuch as it portends the loss of Dulcinea and
his consequent impotence to restore the world of chivalry: Cupid
(love), the angel (heavenly spirit), the emperor (earthly power), are all
associated with Death, and the knight appears to be somehow
emasculated in his feathery hat. The ‘Cart of the Parliament of Death’
episode is rounded off with the antics of a clownish devil who taunts
the mad knight, causing him to be thrown off Rocinante when the
horse bolts in alarm.
In Chapter 12, Don Quixote comes across the Knight of the Forest
[Caballero del Bosque], referred to also as the Knight of the Mirrors
[Caballero del los Espejos], who claims that his lady Casildea is more
beautiful than Dulcinea and declares that he had recently defeated a
knight calling himself Don Quixote who denied this truth. Not only
does this stranger threaten the supremacy of Dulcinea’s beauty, he also
undermines the knight’s already insecure sense of his own destiny. In
Chapter 14, the ‘real’ Don Quixote challenges him to a duel in which
the mad knight, surprisingly, is victorious, knocking down his rival
when the latter’s horse refuses to budge. The Knight of the Mirrors is
none other than Sansón Carrasco, who has set forth from his home
village in order to induce Don Quixote to return home. Though his
intentions may have been good, Sansón’s defeat so annoys him that he
vows to take his revenge.26
In Chapter 16, Cervantes introduces Don Diego de Miranda, a man
of a similar age and class as Don Quixote, who leads a comfortable,
well-regulated life as a country gentleman, much as Alonso Quijano
might have done had he not gone off his head. If the Knight of the
Mirrors was a menacing reflection of Don Quixote’s knightly persona,
Don Diego de Miranda’s routinely normal existence shows up the
unique, precarious oddity of Quixote’s chivalric aspirations. This point
is not lost on the madman: ‘Esta figura que vuesa merced en mí ha
visto, por ser tan nueva y tan fuera de las que comúnmente se usan, no
me maravillaría yo de que le hubiese maravillado’ [‘The appearance
that I present to you is so strange and out of the ordinary that it would
not surprise me to learn that it has filled you with wonder’].27 When
they come across a wagon transporting two caged lions to the royal
court, Don Quixote takes the opportunity to vindicate his chosen
career. To everyone’s alarm, he insists on engaging one of the beasts
with his sword but, mercifully, the lion cannot be bothered to attack
the knight and just turns away. Even so, despite the comical anti-
climax, Don Quixote seems justified in regarding this ‘adventure’ as a
moral victory, given that he did after all display the courage of a true
knight errant. Nevertheless, he is once again all too conscious of the
strange impression Don Diego must have formed of him:
¿Quién duda, señor don Diego de Miranda, que vuestra merced no me
tenga en su opinión por un hombre disparatado y loco? Y no sería
mucho que así fuese, porque mis obras no pueden dar testimonio de
otra cosa. Pues, con todo esto, quiero que vuestra merced advierta que
no soy tan loco ni tan menguado como debo de haberle parecido.
[‘Who can doubt, Don Diego de Miranda sir, that your opinion of me is
that I am a man who is both foolish and mad? And it would be no
wonder if you did, because it is the only conclusion to be drawn from
my deeds. Well, in spite of all that, I should like you to observe that I
am not as mad or as foolish as I must have seemed’].28
Don Quixote then proceeds to justify the ways and values of knight
errantry to Don Diego, who is amazed by his paradoxical combination
of madness and intelligence.
Following his semi-victory, Don Quixote is invited to stay at Don
Diego’s house, where he meets his son, a student of law. Father and son
cannot make out whether Don Quixote is sound of mind or not, but
never once do they mock him; rather, they treat him with respect and
marvel at the paradox he embodies. When Don Quixote learns that the
son is a budding poet, he urges the father to encourage the youth’s
poetic vocation. He had earlier exalted the art of poetry to Don Diego
(II.16), comparing it to a beautiful damsel, and since Cervantes himself
had personified poetry in similar terms in his novella La gitanilla, this
correspondence could be taken to indicate a certain sympathy with the
madman’s views, which would underscore the pathos of his condition
as the victim of a ludicrous mania.
Despite Cervantes’s claim that he had refrained from interpolating
tales in Part II, the sojourn with Don Diego de Miranda is followed by
the story of Camacho’s wedding (II.19–21), in which the protagonists
are little more than onlookers. Knight and squire encounter two
shepherds who tell them of their friend Basilio’s frustrated love for the
beautiful Quiteria, who is going to be married off by her father to the
prosperous farmer Camacho. Don Quixote and Sancho attend the
wedding, during which Basilio turns up and pretends to commit
suicide, a desperate gambit that succeeds in making Camacho recognize
that Quiteria and Basilio are truly in love, so he decides to forgo the
marriage but proceed with the wedding feast anyway. The story
illustrates the perennial romantic theme of the triumph of love over
material interest, a theme congenial to Don Quixote, but Cervantes
gives it a veneer of realism by setting it in an ordinary country village
in contemporary Spain.
Romance and realism are mixed in a quite different manner in the
amazing episode that describes Don Quixote’s descent into the
underground Cave of Montesinos (II. 22–3). As with the ‘Cart of the
Parliament of Death’ episode, Cervantes was experimenting here with
ways of laying bare the internal world of his hero. Caves, after all, have
long been represented in literary tradition as mysterious places that
afford access to some ulterior dimension of experience.29 Indeed, the
knight’s account of what he found in the cave contains both
paradisiacal and infernal elements.30 He had woken from a deep sleep
to find himself before a beautiful crystal palace from which emerged a
venerable old man—Montesinos himself, a character from the Spanish
Carolingian romance tradition—who took him to meet other famous
personages, all of them enchanted by Merlin. But the description
becomes an unconscious parody of chivalric romance, interspersed as it
is with jarringly crude details of which the madman seems to be
unaware. Don Quixote’s account is characterized by mercurial
transitions from the comic to the poignant and back again. For
example, he claims to have come upon the knight Sir Durandarte, who
is lying enchanted in the cave after having been mortally wounded in
the famous battle of Roncesvaux Pass. According to legend, Durandarte
had asked his friend Montesinos to cut his heart from his chest after his
death so that it might be conveyed to his lady Belerma as a token of his
love. And Don Quixote now relates that Montesinos reassured the
enchanted Durandarte that he had indeed carried out his request and
had even pickled the heart with salt to avoid it rotting and smelling
bad when it reached Belerma.
These comic notes, however, are blended with touching insights into
Don Quixote’s anxieties. Shortly afterwards, he sees three girls ‘que por
aquellos amenísimos campos iban saltando y brincando como cabras’
[‘leaping and frolicking in those delightful meadows like three
goats’].31 He recognized them as the enchanted Dulcinea and her
maidservants, but when he went up to speak to Dulcinea she did not
reply: ‘antes me volvió las espaldas y se fue huyendo con tanta prisa,
que no la alcanzara una jara’ [‘she turned her back on me and ran away
so fast that a crossbow bolt could not have caught her’].32 Despite
being rebuffed by Dulcinea, he was told by Montesinos that in time he
would be advised how to release all these characters from their spell,
but no sooner did he receive this reassuring information than he was
approached by one of Dulcinea’s maidservants who asked to pawn a
petticoat for six reales because her mistress was ‘en una gran necesidad’
[‘in great need’].33 Don Quixote, alas, had only four reales to offer his
lady but promised he would not rest until he succeeded in liberating
her from her bewitchment. The frustrated encounter with Dulcinea,
together with her handmaiden’s pathetic request, reveal Cervantes’s
dazzling inventiveness at its astonishing best, indicating as they do how
fully the deluded knight has absorbed Sancho’s lie and how deeply it
has wounded him. This encounter, moreover, lends the episode a
certain mythic quality: Don Quixote is briefly transformed into an
Orphic figure who descends into the underworld seeking to release
Dulcinea, his unreachable Eurydice, from the Hades into which
Sancho’s lie had cast her.
A modern reader might be tempted to interpret the Cave of
Montesinos as a representation of the knight’s unconscious mind, since
it suggests both delusions of grandeur and fears of inadequacy (Freud
was a great admirer of Cervantes’s work).34 That, of course, would be
anachronistic, but it is not unreasonable to suppose that Cervantes
might have wished to represent this mysterious experience as a dream
or vision whose comical distortions and exaggerations, though part and
parcel of the general parody, reflected also the knight’s distress at the
possibility that he might fail in his mission to restore the world of
chivalry. The entire episode is shot through with sudden transitions
from the comic to the poignant and back again. Indeed, when the
knight emerges from the cave he cannot convince Sancho, the secret
author of Dulcinea’s ‘enchantment’, that his experience was not a
dream or a fantasy. The squire’s scepticism is even shared by the
translator of Cide Hamete’s account, who, according to Cervantes, left a
note in the margin of the text expressing doubts about the truth of the
adventure but stating also his belief that Don Quixote could not
possibly have been lying. Once more, we find Cervantes playing his
ironic game of hide-and-seek with his reader under the cloak of the
text: ‘Tú, letor, pues eres prudente, juzga lo que te pareciere’ [‘You,
wise reader, must make up your own mind’].35 In Part I, the author’s
continual playing around the boundaries between fact and fantasy is
primarily a comic device, but in Part II it is much more than that.
Owing to the trauma of Dulcinea’s controversial bewitchment, these
prevarications over the truth of Don Quixote’s experience in
Montesinos’ Cave can be regarded as metafictional projections of the
knight’s troubled feelings.
The question of Dulcinea comes up again soon afterwards, when
they put up at an inn and meet the puppeteer Master Pedro, whose left
eye and half his face are covered by a green cloth (II.25). This patently
dodgy character owns an ape, which is said to possess the gift of
prophecy. Sancho suggests they ask the ape what really happened in
the cave, but the creature’s reply is slyly noncommittal: some of the
things Don Quixote saw were false, others were ‘verisimilar’.36 Master
Pedro then puts on a puppet-play involving the rescue of a captive
damsel by her lover from the citadel of a Moorish king. And just as the
Knight of the Mirrors and Don Diego de Miranda appeared some
chapters earlier as contrary reflections of Don Quixote, so too can
Master Pedro the puppet-master be seen as a mirror-image of Cervantes
himself, for not only does his puppet-play turn out to be a miniature
parody of a chivalric romance, it also reproduces the metafictional
relations between author, narrator, characters, and spectators that
characterize the Quixote as a whole (II. 26).37
Master Pedro disappears behind the stage, much as Cervantes hides
behind the text; the boy-narrator keeps getting things wrong, provoking
criticism from Don Quixote and occasional chiding by the puppet-
master, which parallels the way Cervantes, as the ‘segundo autor’,
intermittently critiques Cide Hamete’s narration of events. As the
puppet-play approaches its climax, with the fleeing Christian lovers
being pursued by an army of Moors, Don Quixote gets so carried away
that he draws his sword and comes to their aid, smashing the puppets
in the process. Although he compensates the puppeteer for the damage,
he still remains confused about the difference between fact and fiction,
which is the basic reason for his madness, after all. As for Master Pedro,
he turns out to be a mountebank who travels about the country fleecing
the public and is identified as none other than Ginés de Pasamonte, one
of the galley slaves liberated by Don Quixote in Part I, who had been
writing his life-story, which he boasted would be much better than the
picaresque tale of Lazarillo de Tormes and all the others of that kind
(I.22).
Don Quixote will keep looking for auguries of success but is never
granted a sure sign. When he finds an empty boat on the banks of the
River Ebro (II.29), he interprets this as a good omen. Drifting
downriver on the boat, he comes across some water-mills, which he
declares to be a castle, but when the hoped-for adventure ends in
disaster he is left confused and despondent: ‘Dios lo remedie, que este
mundo es máquina y trazas, contrarias unas de otras. Yo no puedo más’
[‘May God send a remedy; for everything in this world is trickery, stage
machinery, every part of it working against every other part. I have
done all I can’].38 Sancho too reaches the end of his tether and resolves
to abandon his master at the next opportunity because he can no longer
see any benefit to be had from tolerating Don Quixote’s fantasies. And
once again we observe a strain of cruelty in his character, since he is
prepared to leave without bothering with explanations or farewells: ‘sin
entrar en cuentas ni en despedimientos con su señor’.39
Cervantes, however, invented a way of shoring up the faltering
relationship by giving Don Quixote’s morale an unexpected boost and
by rekindling Sancho’s material self-interest. In II.30, the pair are
invited to become the guests of a genuine Duke and Duchess, and the
splendid, ceremonious welcome they receive at the ducal palace goes
some way to renewing Don Quixote’s self-belief: ‘y aquel fue el primer
día que de todo en todo conoció y creyó ser caballero andante
verdadero, y no fantástico, viéndose tratar del mismo modo que él
había leído se trataban los tales caballeros en los pasados siglos’ [‘and
that was the first day when he was fully convinced that he was a real
knight errant, not a fantasy one, seeing himself treated in the same way
as he’d read that such knights used to be treated in centuries past’].40
The truth, however, is that the Duke and Duchess, having read Part I,
wish to amuse themselves by playing tricks on the unsuspecting duo,
the general effect of which will be to promote Sancho Panza over and
above his master by offering him the prospect of finally realizing his
social ambitions.
Cervantes will now bring fully into the open the political dimension
of the Quixote-Sancho relationship, which had been more or less latent
since the fulling mills episode in I.20. By enmeshing Don Quixote’s
chivalric fantasies in the real world of power and status at the Duke’s
castle, Cervantes raised issues of authority and justice that were being
debated in Spain at this time. Central to these debates was the question
of distinguishing between legitimate authority and ‘tyranny’: a señor
natural or ‘natural lord’ should exercise his power according to
Christian morality and for the sake of the common good, but if he did
so out of mere self-interest, without regard for the rights of his subjects,
he would be acting as a tyrant. Thus, when the Duke promises Sancho
an island to govern, his chaplain and counsellor reprimands him for
encouraging the madman and a simpleton like Sancho: ‘¡Mirad si no
han de ser ellos locos, pues los cuerdos canonizan sus locuras!’ [‘How
can they fail to be mad when sane men sanction their madness?’].41 But
since the Duke pays no attention to his objections, the cleric quits the
palace in disgust. His abrupt departure suggests that the hoaxes the
Duke proposes to play on Don Quixote and Sancho constitute a sort of
‘tyrannical’ abuse of authority.42
Thanks to Sancho, the Duke and Duchess come to learn about
Dulcinea’s enchantment and Don Quixote’s alleged experience in the
Cave of Montesinos (II.33), and, seizing on this new information, they
organize a magnificent pageant designed to torment the mad knight by
duping him into believing that he is witnessing at last what he had
expected to see in El Toboso—Aldonza Lorenzo transfigured into the
chivalric princess Dulcinea. Cervantes artfully builds up the suspense,
drama, and spectacle of Don Quixote’s poignant, dream-like vision of
his lady, an event for which he had so long craved. During a night-time
hunt there appears a procession of enchanters borne upon various
carriages and illuminated by numerous horsemen in white robes
carrying flaming torches. Bringing up the rear comes a chariot three
times the size of the others, bearing a ‘nymph’ seated on a throne,
‘vestida de mil velos de tela de plata, brillando por todos ellos infinitas
hojas de argentería de oro’ [‘wearing a thousand pieces of silver cloth,
with countless golden spangles glittering all over them’]; her face is
covered by ‘un transparente y delicado cendal’ [‘a diaphanous veil’],
through which could be glimpsed ‘un hermosísimo rostro de doncella’
[‘a lovely maiden’s face’]. This is none other than ‘Dulcinea’ (in fact, it
is a page-boy in female disguise) and Don Quixote is amazed that he
has at last been granted sight of his beautiful princess in such dazzling
attire. Next to her, however, stands a figure, also veiled but dressed all
in black, who uncovers its face to reveal ‘la mesma figura de la muerte,
descarnada y fea’ [‘Death itself, fleshless and hideous’].43
The majestic chariot upon which the putative ‘Dulcinea’ is
enthroned harks back to the episode involving the cart bearing a group
of costumed actors, which Cervantes significantly placed just after the
scene of the ‘enchantment’ of Dulcinea, and where the dejected Don
Quixote saw Cupid lying at the feet of the figure of Death. Now, in this
latter scene, the awesome figure in black, a much grander avatar of
that earlier black-robed character, identifies himself as the great wizard
Merlin, who goes on to prophesy that Dulcinea will be released from
her spell only if and when Sancho Panza administers 3,300 lashes on
his backside (II.35). In other words, Merlin invests Sancho with the
exclusive power to disenchant Dulcinea, and he must do so of his own
volition and in the time he alone should determine. When the squire
refuses to comply, ‘Dulcinea’ herself rises to her feet and delivers a
spirited exhortation to Sancho—comical in its wilful ineptitude—to
apply the required lashes. Sancho still objects to this remedy, but when
the Duke threatens to refuse him the governorship of an island on
account of his cowardice, he agrees to the deal, whereupon ‘don
Quijote se colgó del cuello de Sancho, dándole mil besos en la frente y
las mejillas’ [‘Don Quixote draped himself around Sancho’s neck,
smothering him in kisses on the forehead and the cheeks’],44 in a
graphic demonstration of his critical dependence upon his servant. As
Merlin’s chariot moves off, there is another ominous sign of the transfer
of power that has just taken place: ‘El carro comenzó a caminar; y al
pasar la hermosa Dulcinea, inclinó la cabeza a los duques y hizo una
gran reverencia a Sancho’ [‘The chariot began to move; and as the
lovely Dulcinea went by she bowed her head to the Duke and Duchess
and made a low curtsey to Sancho’].45
The next hoax concerns the plight of the Countess Trifaldi (II.36–
41), also known as the Dueña Dolorida (the ‘Dolorous Duenna’), whose
storyline is a parody of one of the most hackneyed themes of chivalric
literature—the liberation of a damsel in distress by a heroic knight. In
this case, the damsel is the Dueña Dolorida’s daughter Antonomasia. A
central element of this pseudo-adventure involves a famous wooden
horse called Clavileño, upon which Quixote and Sancho are said to ride
through the skies to engage in combat with the giant enchanter
Malambruno (II.40–1). Needless to say, Don Quixote is allowed to
succeed in this adventure, to general acclaim and celebration.
These two burlesque spectacles are entirely consistent with
Cervantes’s parody of the libros de caballerías, and in this respect the
reader joins with the Duke and his court in laughing at the gullibility of
the mad knight and his simple squire.46 Yet after the Countess Trifaldi
hoax, the sense of the parody subtly changes, and the reader’s response
to the mocking of Quixote and Sancho becomes more ambivalent. In
Chapter 44, Sancho’s departure for the fictitious ‘island’ of Barataria (it
is actually landlocked), where he has been appointed governor by the
Duke, results in the bifurcation of the narrative into alternate strands,
one dealing with Don Quixote at the ducal palace, the other with the
squire at Barataria, a divergence that produces a counterpoint between
their respective fortunes.
Cervantes deftly shifts and slides between varying degrees of pathos
and mockery in the chapters dealing with Don Quixote. When the
Duchess asks why he is so melancholy, he confesses that, although he
misses Sancho, he is also sad about the condition of his lady. This
admission gives the Duchess the idea of teasing the knight by getting
her mischievous maid Altisidora to pretend to have fallen in love with
him. Altisidora sings a burlesque love-song to the lonely knight (II.44),
but he responds by composing a ballad expressing his unyielding love
for Dulcinea (II.46). The contrast between Altisidora’s malicious spoof
and Don Quixote’s perfectly rendered composition invites sympathy for
the knight’s desolation, deluded though he is. Yet no sooner does he
finish his heartfelt song than he suffers another prank at the hands of
the Duchess and her maidservant, who lower a sack full of cats from
the floor above, several of which scratch his face so badly that he has
to spend five days recovering in bed. Even the Duke and Duchess, we
are told, feel upset at the severity of the madman’s wounds.47
Cervantes’s portrayal of the poor lunatic as the innocent victim of
such nasty tricks surely invites the reader to question the ethics of the
Duke and Duchess’s use of their power, and to this extent, it justifies
the moral outrage expressed at the outset by their own chaplain.48
Ethical doubts are also reinforced by political misgivings when Don
Quixote is approached by Doña Rodríguez, a duenna at the Duke’s
court, with a request to help her obtain justice for her daughter, who
has been seduced on a promise of marriage by the son of a rich farmer
and then abandoned. The reader will be surprised to learn that Doña
Rodríguez has a substantial complaint against the Duke: she accuses
him of ignoring her daughter’s case because he owes money to the
seducer’s father. The problem is genuine, the duenna’s distress is real,
so this is a case the Duke, as the señor natural of his vassals, has the
responsibility to address in the interests of justice. But when Don
Quixote takes up the matter with the great lord, the latter proposes that
it be resolved in a chivalric duel between Don Quixote and the farmer’s
son (who in fact will be impersonated by one of the Duke’s lackeys). In
this regard it is telling that the narrator refers to Doña Rodríguez as ‘la
segunda Dueña Dolorida’ [‘the second Dolorous Duenna’],49 a reference
to the fictitious Countess Trifaldi and her daughter Antonomasia who
featured in the earlier chivalric spoof mounted by the Duke. Cervantes
is surely hinting here at the arrogant cynicism of the Duke, who
exploits Doña Rodríguez’s grievance in order to devise yet another
chivalric parody for his own amusement. Cervantes nevertheless turns
the tables on the Duke, for Don Quixote’s unexpected victory in the
duel (II.56) represents a vindication of sorts, inasmuch as it upholds
traditional values of honour and justice and thwarts the ‘tyrannical’
designs of the mighty Duke, if only for a while.
Interlaced with these chapters, we have the account of Sancho’s
governorship of the ‘island’ of Barataria. The Duke and Duchess feed
the peasant’s ambition by writing him flattering letters, and Sancho is
thoroughly taken in, to the point of sending his wife Teresa a letter
urging her to prepare for her new status as the consort of a governor,
and to groom their daughter Sanchica for marriage to a man of means.
A hoax the whole thing may be, but as with Don Quixote and Doña
Rodríguez, Cervantes springs a surprise on the ducal couple (and on the
reader). The illiterate Sancho is much cannier than expected, and
comes up with sensible, and at times ingenious, judgements when
required to adjudicate a series of civil disputes; so much so that the
clerk assigned to record his every word and action cannot tell whether
he is ‘tonto’ or ‘discreto’ [‘a simpleton’ or ‘a sage’].50 Such is Sancho’s
success as governor, the narrator observes, that: ‘ordenó cosas tan
buenas, que hasta hoy se guardan en aquel lugar, y se nombran “Las
constituciones del gran gobernador Sancho Panza”’ [‘Sancho made such
excellent by-laws that they have remained in force in the town to this
day, and they are called “The Ordinances of the Great Governor Sancho
Panza”’].51 As governor of Barataria, then, Sancho blossoms as a
paradoxical character almost on a par with Don Quixote himself.
What is one to make of Sancho’s governorship at Barataria? There is
a widely-held view among modern cervantistas that the peasant’s
governorship calls into question the social hierarchy of early-modern
Spain by offering a glimpse of an alternative order, where political
authority would be based on personal merit rather than on the
privilege of birth. One of the leading exponents of this interpretation
was José Antonio Maravall, who believed that the Quixote as a whole
reflected Cervantes’s disillusion with the supposed impossibility of
reforming Spanish society along principles derived from Erasmus.52
Maravall argued that Sancho’s governorship at Barataria represented an
exemplary humanist ‘utopia’ in which ‘natural reason and a good
Christian conscience’ would be the basic qualifications for government
rather than birth and aristocratic privilege.53 Some scholars have
studied Sancho’s governorship in a similar vein but from a Bakhtinian
perspective, as a ‘carnivalesque’ challenge to the dominant ideology.54
For Augustin Redondo, Sancho is ‘a sincere Christian’ whose
governorship serves as a ‘lesson in public ethics’ and, following
Maravall, he wondered whether Cervantes was suggesting that ‘this
desire for rectitude and justice was no more than a dream which could
only be realized in another world, in a longed-for Age of Gold’.55 James
Iffland observed that the ‘world upside down’ of Barataria ‘reveals the
true wisdom and capacity to govern of a poor illiterate peasant’, a
revelation which has ‘important socio-political ramifications’.56
It is a moot point, however, whether Cervantes was advocating a
radical, ‘utopian’ reconstruction of society on meritocratic lines. In so
far as Sancho’s governorship may have political significance, it could be
said to represent a veiled satirical critique of the excesses of the
contemporary 
aristocracy. 
His 
surprising 
competence 
in 
the
governorship serves to show up the Duke’s dereliction of his duties as a
señor natural, but does it follow that Cervantes wished to question the
validity of the principle of social hierarchy itself? Barataria, I would
say, is best understood as forming part of Cervantes’s ironic strategy of
challenging the reader’s preconceptions and expectations: in this case,
through a fictional inversion of power in ‘carnivalesque’ mode, which
briefly unsettles the socio-political hierarchy. In reality, of course,
Carnival was a cathartic indulgence in a ‘world upside down’, but after
a short period of licence, the established order was restored. Similarly,
Barataria concludes with the peasant willingly returning to the humble
station that heaven had ordained for him at birth. When the Duke
organizes a nocturnal attack on the ‘island’, Sancho proves too
cowardly to act as a proper leader and decides to relinquish his post,
having allegedly perceived the vanity of power and ambition: ‘Yo no
nací para ser gobernador ni para defender ínsulas ni ciudades…Bien se
está cada uno usando el oficio para que fue nacido’ [‘I wasn’t born to
be a governor or defend islands or cities from the enemies that choose
to attack them…each man’s all right doing the job he was born for’].57
There is indeed criticism of the powers-that-be in Don Quixote, but it
is effected through the play of ambiguity and irony. Perhaps this is why
Cervantes chose to place at the tail end of the Barataria sequence an
episode that would seem to imply criticism of royal policy no less. As
Sancho makes his way back to the Duke’s palace (II.54), he comes
across six German pilgrims, one of whom turns out to be a Spaniard
called Ricote, who was formerly a neighbour of his in La Mancha but
who, being a Morisco or descendant of forcibly converted Muslims, has
been living in exile in the German lands. The Ricote episode brings the
Quixote right up to date in terms of current affairs in Spain. Between
1568 and 1571 the Moriscos of the Alpujarras, a region south of
Granada, had risen in a massive rebellion against the repression of their
language, dress, and customs. After this uprising was put down, the
Moriscos of the former Muslim kingdom of Granada, who had long
been suspected of secret Islamic observance and of collusion with
Spain’s Muslim enemies in North Africa, had been resettled in various
parts of the Kingdom of Castile, but eventually the crown resolved to
expel en masse from the Peninsula all the diverse communities of
Moriscos in Spain in a vast operation undertaken between 1609 and
1614, a period during which Cervantes was working on Part II of Don
Quixote.
The royal policy raised complex political and ethical issues, which is
perhaps why the portrayal of the Morisco Ricote is riddled with such
perplexing ambiguities. Opinion in Spain was divided over the justice
of the expulsion, and from his equivocal treatment of Ricote we might
infer that Cervantes was divided too. On the one hand, Ricote praises
the king’s policy, claiming it must have been divinely inspired because
of the ‘ruines y disparatados intentos que los nuestros tenían’ [‘my
people’s base and absurd intentions’], but on the other, he laments the
‘terrible punishment’ that exile entails, saying of his people: ‘Doquier
que estamos lloramos por España’ [‘Wherever we are we weep for
Spain’],58 which suggests that Cervantes sympathized with their plight.
Many Moriscos, in fact, were sincere Christians and for the king to
expel these good Catholics from their rightful homeland might be
deemed to be a tyrannical act. But how to tell the genuine Christians
from the crypto-Muslims? Ricote’s own family exemplified the
dilemma. His wife and daughter are devout Catholics who are stranded
in Algiers, having been taken there by his brother-in-law. Our
sympathy for the beleaguered women is deepened by Sancho’s recalling
their forced departure from their home village, a scene so affecting that
Sancho himself was moved to tears. Some of their neighbours, he says,
were tempted to hide Ricote’s daughter and even to snatch her back
from her guards, but they were deterred by their fear of going against
the king’s decree. Sancho then takes his leave of Ricote and resumes his
journey back to the Duke’s palace, but this is not the end of the matter,
as we shall see.
* * *
While Cervantes’s critique of the Duke’s ‘tyrannical’ abuses is guarded
and, it may be argued, even politically conservative, the episodes at the
palace are subversive in literary terms, for it is here that his original
aim to destroy the narrative system of the books of chivalry is fully
achieved. The linchpin of that system was Providence, which could be
relied upon to lead the hero to fame and glory, but within the bubble of
his madness, Don Quixote has been repeatedly denied the means of
success. Most of his adventures have resulted in failure: other than
Montesinos’s false prediction about Merlin, not a single augury of good
fortune has appeared, neither has a benign wizard or some other kind
soul come to his aid; and not least, when his lady-love became the
victim of a wicked enchanter, our aspiring hero proved incapable of
setting her free. The coup de grâce was delivered by the Duke: it was he
who gave Sancho the much-coveted governorship of an island and not
Don Quixote, who had promised an island to his squire from the very
beginning of their relationship. Not only that: unlike his squire, the
knight himself receives no reward at all. Thus, the peasant’s comical
apotheosis at Barataria is consistent with the transfer of power from
master to servant that resulted from Sancho’s deceitful ‘enchanting’ of
Dulcinea in Chapter 10. The absence of Providence as the guiding
principle of the would-be hero’s career represents, in effect, the
breakdown of the narrative conventions of chivalric romance such as
they had functioned since their origins in the works of Chrétien de
Troyes. What else remained to be done? One has only to consider the
difficulties faced by Cervantes in prolonging the Quixote-Sancho
relationship to realize that his parody of the libros de caballerías had
played itself out.
After Sancho’s return from Barataria, Cervantes at first attempts to
re-build Don Quixote’s authority over his squire. On his way back to
the Duke’s palace, the ex-governor happens to fall into an underground
cave (there is a parallel here with the Cave of Montesinos) and calls out
for someone to rescue him. Don Quixote’s ‘providential’ appearance
persuades the terrified Sancho that he should enter the knight’s service
once again. And so, the two men are reunited and the hierarchy
between knight and squire is duly restored. Sancho’s renewed deference
to his master is confirmed when they resume their wanderings after
leaving the Duke’s palace. They come across statues of four Christian
knights and Don Quixote extols them for their saintly endeavours.
Sancho marvels at his wisdom: ‘Quedó Sancho de nuevo, como si jamás
hubiera conocido a su señor, admirado de lo que sabía.’ [‘For Sancho it
had been like meeting his master for the first time, and he was lost in
admiration for his erudition.’]59
Soon afterwards, they encounter two beautiful maidens dressed as
shepherdesses, who are taking part in a pastoral pageant, and when
they are introduced to the other participants in this rarefied aristocratic
pastime, the knight is welcomed into their company without a trace of
mockery or disrespect, in marked contrast to the treatment he had
received at the hands of the Duke and Duchess. But the ending of this
Arcadian episode illustrates Cervantes’s difficulty after reuniting knight
and squire. Don Quixote decides to thank his hosts for their hospitality
by standing in the middle of the royal highway for two whole days in
order to challenge any passing knight to declare that, with the
exception of Dulcinea, the two shepherdesses are the fairest maidens in
the world. His chivalrous gesture, however, results in a horrible
trampling by a herd of bulls (II.58). This calamitous incident suggests
that Cervantes could not uphold Don Quixote’s authority over Sancho
for very long without allowing the comic logic of the parody to assert
itself once more, and this logic begged the question: for how long could
the servant be expected to tolerate his master’s crazy antics? Would it
not be more plausible for Sancho to opt out of the quixotic bubble
altogether and just go home, as he had resolved to do before they
happened to meet the Duchess in II.30?
The fact was that the story of Don Quixote had been told in all its
essentials, and at this juncture Cervantes would have had little option
but to bring the parody to a close. However, he still had to confront an
awkward issue: should he unleash the potentially destructive dynamic
created by Merlin’s prophecy back in Chapter 35, when Sancho had
been invested with the exclusive power to break Dulcinea’s evil spell?
This prophecy was bound to reproduce the ‘world upside down’ within
the Quixote-Sancho relationship which Cervantes had tried to put right
after Barataria. In the event, he chose to portray the inevitable clash of
interests between knight and squire in Chapter 60. Don Quixote
becomes so frustrated with Sancho’s reluctance to apply Merlin’s
remedy that he tries to whip the squire himself. Sancho reacts with
great fury, wrestles Don Quixote to the ground, and places his knee on
his master’s chest to hold him down. The knight is horrified by this
effrontery: ‘¿Cómo, traidor? ¿Contra tu amo y señor natural te
desmandas? ¿Con quien te da su pan te atreves?’; [‘What, you traitor?
You defy your own natural lord? You raise your hand against the man
who feeds you?’]; but Sancho remains defiant: ‘Ni quito rey ni pongo
rey…sino ayúdome a mí, que soy mi señor’ [‘I depose no king, I impose
no king…but I’ll help myself, for I’m my own lord’].60 The servant takes
his insubordination even further, presenting the knight with an
ultimatum: he must promise not to try and flog him again, ‘donde no,
aquí morirás, traidor’ [‘but if not, you’ll die here and now, you
traitor’].61 Don Quixote surrenders, and vows never to lay hands on
him again.
There is no interpretation that takes this shocking fight properly into
account, perhaps because it violates the deeply entrenched notion of a
growing fraternal bond between knight and squire. Salvador de
Madariaga wrote that it was ‘one page which every reader of Don
Quixote would wish unwritten’.62 And yet, it is one of the crucial scenes
in the novel, for Sancho’s rebellion against his señor natural, his ‘natural
lord’, is a logical consequence of his gradual ascendancy in Part II: this
is where an irreversible inversion of power actually takes place
(Barataria was but a comical foreshadowing contrived by the Duke);
here is where the servant finally achieves complete dominance over his
mad master, who must henceforth accept his impotence to determine
his own destiny.63 And far from being an isolated incident, this
rebellion would have consequences that Cervantes was bold enough to
follow through to the end.
* * *
At this point we must consider an unexpected development in the
writing of Don Quixote. Most likely towards the middle of 1614,
Cervantes learned of the publication of a sequel to his own Part I by a
rival author using the pseudonym Alonso Fernández de Avellaneda.64
Cervantes’s anger at being usurped by a plagiarist is understandable—
he wanted to safeguard his rights as the creator of Don Quixote.
However, he was operating in a literary marketplace where intellectual
property was not protected by law, so without copyright, how could he
legitimize his claim to the Knight of La Mancha? He had to find other
means of securing his right to be recognised as the true inventor of Don
Quixote. In this respect, I think it is significant that he chose to place
his first reference to Avellaneda just before Sancho’s violent rebellion
against his master in Chapter 60. Thus, in Chapter 59, Don Quixote
overhears two gentlemen talking about a sequel to the Quixote in which
the knight is said to have renounced his love for Dulcinea. Cervantes’s
‘true’ Don Quixote is appalled by this outrageous claim and declares it
to be impossible. The juxtaposition of these two events betrays
Cervantes’s awareness of a certain parallel between Sancho’s assault on
his master’s political authority and Avellaneda’s challenge to his own
literary authority.65 And so, another kind of power contest erupted
within the text of the Quixote itself as Cervantes engaged in a bitter
struggle against Avellaneda.66
The last fifteen chapters or so have received very patchy,
inconsistent critical attention, when they have not simply been
overlooked. We find a certain turbulence, as it were, in the unfolding of
the narrative—interpolations, revisions, repetitions, all of them signs
that Cervantes was unnerved by the threat of Avellaneda’s plagiarism.67
For the rest of Part II he would make disparaging references to the man
who threatened to rob him of his most successful creation. But his
response went beyond mere insult—he invented a number of ingenious
devices to discredit Avellaneda within the fictional world itself. As
already mentioned, the ‘true’ Don Quixote meets two readers of
Avellaneda’s ‘apocryphal’ sequel in Chapter 59 and hears of the
existence of an impostor, a doppelganger, who has fallen out of love
with Dulcinea. This reflexive device is ingeniously compounded in
Chapter 72, when Don Quixote comes across Don Álvaro Tarfe, a
character invented by Avellaneda, who will acknowledge that
Cervantes’s character is the ‘authentic’ knight of La Mancha, even
signing a legal document to that effect. However, Cervantes’s most
substantial response to Avellaneda was the decision to change the
course of the narrative itself: in Chapter 59, Don Quixote decides to
prove his autonomy from his ‘false’ double by changing his plan to visit
Zaragoza—where Avellaneda had sent the ‘fake’ Don Quixote—and
visit Barcelona instead.
Nevertheless, as I have previously argued elsewhere, the Barcelona
episodes represent a digression from the main Quixote-Sancho
storyline, and there are signs of narrative ‘padding’ and recycling of
ideas, suggesting that Cervantes composed these chapters in haste and
with flagging inspiration.68 The detour to Barcelona was conceived
with the purpose of belittling Avellaneda, so it is no surprise that the
mad knight is somewhat passive and marginal in these chapters, and
even Sancho is relatively subdued. The exaggeratedly triumphal
welcome the pair receive when they enter the city, their stroll through
the streets, and their ceremonial reception aboard the galleys, are all
designed to demonstrate the great fame of Cervantes’s ‘true’
protagonists, thereby putting Avellaneda’s sequel well in the shade.
Knight and squire are guests at the house of the wealthy citizen, Don
Antonio Moreno, and like the Duke and Duchess before him, their host
will play some fairly cruel tricks on the madman, albeit on a minor
scale; for example, a notice of Don Quixote’s identity is pinned on his
back so as to invite the populace to jeer at him in the street. Don
Antonio also shows the pair an ‘enchanted head’, which, like Master
Pedro’s prophesying ape, is said to foretell the future. The knight
naturally wants to find out whether Dulcinea will be disenchanted,
whereas Sancho asks whether he will ever get another governorship, a
sign that his ambition has not altogether disappeared. Cervantes also
has recourse to interpolated episodes and stories, despite having earlier
decided not to include any in Part II. The pair spend time with the
Catalan brigand Roque Guinart and his men, which provides the setting
for the story of Claudia Jerónima (II.60), another tale of love and
honour in which a maiden asks Roque to help her escape to France
because she has shot her lover for having betrayed her by agreeing to
marry another girl. The story has a tragic end, with Claudia repenting
her violent jealousy as she sees her lover, who reveals that his alleged
infidelity was just a malicious rumour, expiring before her very eyes.
In Barcelona, Cervantes takes up the matter of the Moriscos once
more with a second interpolated story. A beautiful Morisca arrives in
the city’s harbour disguised as the captain of a Turkish galley but
professing her sincere Christian faith. A man in the listening crowd
turns out to be Ricote, who recognizes her as his exiled daughter, Ana
Félix. She then tells of her thwarted love for the noble Spaniard Don
Gaspar Gregorio, who has followed her to Algiers and is currently
trapped there in a perilous situation. Cervantes’s treatment of the
expulsion of the Moriscos remains tantalizingly ambiguous, for when
the viceroy and Don Antonio Moreno discuss whether it might be
possible by means of favours and gifts (‘por medio del favor y de las
dádivas’)69 to obtain permission for Ricote and his daughter to remain
in Spain, it is Ricote himself who declares that this would cut no ice
with the great Bernardino de Velasco, Count of Salazar. This was the
man responsible for expelling the Moriscos from Castile, yet Ricote not
only praises his integrity but also lauds the ‘heroic decision’ of the King
of Spain, ‘the great Philip III’, to get rid of the Moriscos, as well as his
wisdom in having charged Salazar with this enterprise.70
Was Ricote’s encomium to the Spanish authorities meant to be
ironic? Maybe so, but the point is that Cervantes hides his hand, and
there is no guidance to help the reader decipher his intentions. And yet,
there may be a clue in the denouement of Ana Félix’s story, for by this
stage, as we have already seen with the Duke and Duchess’s hoaxes,
Cervantes had adapted his ambiguous mode of writing to produce
literary effects that might carry political implications—or perhaps not:
it was up to the reader to decide. Indeed, the story of Ana Félix is one
of the boldest and most sophisticated examples of Cervantes’s ironic
manner. He addresses the controversial issue of the Moriscos’ expulsion
through the unlikely medium of romance, and as with all kinds of
romance, the reader is geared to look forward to a happy ending, so
eventually, and not without straining verisimilitude, Cervantes comes
very close to satisfying these generic expectations by contriving to
reunite Ana Félix with her sweetheart Don Gregorio in Barcelona.
Nevertheless, their happiness will depend on whether the authorities
can be persuaded to permit the Morisca to live in Spain, a question that
will remain unresolved, as Don Antonio says, ‘hasta ver cómo yo
negocio’ [‘until we see the result of my negotiations’].71 This
unresolved ending could be taken as a sign of Cervantes’s sympathy for
the exiled Moriscos, or at least for those who might have been good
Christians, for if Ana Félix were to be torn from Don Gaspar and
banished from Spain once more, the reader’s sentimental hopes would
be dashed by the cruelty of the lovers’ fate. Might Cervantes have been
questioning the justice of the expulsion by exploiting the conventions
of romance in order to engage the reader’s emotions in favour of the
Morisco Ricote’s beautiful daughter?
While knight and squire are still in Barcelona, Cervantes returns to
the main storyline by introducing the scene that will eventually bring
about its denouement (II.64). Sansón Carrasco appears again, seeking
revenge for his earlier defeat by Don Quixote in Chapter 14, when he
had disguised himself as the Knight of the Mirrors. This time he is got
up as the Knight of the White Moon [Caballero de la Blanca Luna] and
defeats Don Quixote in another duel, making him promise to go back
home and give up arms for a year. As the dejected knight starts out on
his homeward journey, he pauses by the site of his defeat to reflect on
the ways of Fortune:
—¡Aquí fue Troya! ¡Aquí mi desdicha, y no mi cobardía, se llevó mis
alcanzadas glorias, aquí usó la fortuna conmigo de sus vueltas y
revueltas, aquí se escurecieron mis hazañas, aquí finalmente cayó mi
ventura para jamás levantarse!
[‘Here once stood Troy! Here my bad luck, and not my cowardice,
deprived me of the glory I had won; here did I feel the fickleness of
fortune; here the lustre of my exploits was obscured; here, in short, my
joy came crashing to the ground, never again to rise!’]72
We can appreciate how closely Don Quixote has come to resembling a
modern literary character in Part II. Anxious, self-doubting,
introspective, and depressed, he ruefully concedes that Providence has
been conspicuous by its absence. Sancho concurs:
—Ésta que llaman por ahí Fortuna es una mujer borracha y antojadiza,
y sobre todo, ciega, y, así, no ve lo que hace, ni sabe a quién derriba ni
a quién ensalza.
[‘What they call fortune is a flighty woman who drinks too much, and,
what’s more, she’s blind, so she can’t see what she’s doing, and she
doesn’t know who she’s knocking over or who she’s raising up’]73
The spiritual order that regulated chivalric romance appears to have
disintegrated. For if one dispenses with Providence, what is left? The
drunken whims of blind fortune, as Sancho puts it. The knight pulls
back from the brink, however, and re-affirms his faith in the Christian
order of the world:
—Lo que te sé decir es que no hay fortuna en el mundo, ni las cosas que
en él suceden, buenas o malas que sean, vienen acaso, sino por
particular providencia de los cielos, y de aquí viene lo que suele decirse:
que cada uno es artífice de su ventura. Yo lo he sido de la mía, pero no
con la prudencia necesaria, y así me han salido al gallarín mis
presunciones.
[‘What I can tell you is that there is no such thing as fortune, and
whatever happens in this world, good and bad, does not occur by
chance, but by special providence of heaven; and for this reason it is
often said that every man is the architect of his own fortune. And I have
been the architect of mine, but not with the necessary prudence, and so
my presumption has led to disaster’].74
This curious scene heralds a change in the treatment of Don Quixote in
this final phase of the novel, in which the contest between master and
servant is played out within the compass of the quixotic madness.
At this juncture, there was little Cervantes could do to avoid
drawing out the consequences of Sancho’s rebellion against Don
Quixote in Chapter 60; so, on the journey home, he would present the
underlying pathos of the mad knight’s decline as fully as the comic
imperative of the parody would allow. On the surface, Don Quixote is
still the master and Sancho the servant but theirs is now a tense,
fraught relationship, with the knight struggling to hang on to the last
shreds of his authority, while the squire resists such pretensions and
reasserts his will to power. When two labourers ask them to settle a
dispute, Don Quixote says he is too troubled to deal with the matter,
but Sancho is keen to adjudicate: ‘A mí, que ha pocos días que salí de
ser gobernador y juez…toca averiguar estas dudas y dar parecer en
todo pleito’ [‘and it’s up to me to settle these doubts and give my
opinion when there’s a disagreement…because it was only a few days
ago that I gave up being a governor and a judge’].75
The resurgent Sancho will progressively disengage himself from the
knight-errant’s chivalric and courtly fantasies. He will cast doubt on the
truth of Merlin’s prophecy—he cannot see why flogging himself would
disenchant Dulcinea: it was like saying, if you have a headache, apply
ointment to your knees.76 When his master toys with the idea of
creating a pastoral idyll, Sancho gently mocks this notion, suggesting
that Sansón Carrasco and the barber might become shepherds too, not
to mention the fun-loving priest, though perhaps not his daughter
Sanchica, since she might fall prey to the other shepherds—he would
not want her to go out to fetch wool and come back shorn.77 Don
Quixote implores him to get on with his flagellation: ‘Rogando te lo
suplico; que no quiero venir contigo a los brazos como la otra vez,
porque sé que los tienes pesados’ [‘I am begging of you, because I don’t
want to fight you like the last time, for I know you have a heavy
hand’]. Sancho still refuses to comply, and the exasperated knight
moans aloud: ‘¡Oh alma endurecida! ¡Oh escudero sin piedad! ¡Oh pan
mal empleado y mercedes mal consideradas las que te he hecho y
pienso de hacerte. Por mí te has visto gobernador y por mí te vees con
esperanzas propincuas de ser conde’ [‘Oh, you stony-souled creature!
Oh, you pitiless squire! Oh, what a waste of the food and the favours I
have lavished on you, and still intend to lavish on you! Thanks to me
you have been a governor, and thanks to me you cherish hopes of being
a count in the near future’].78 Clearly, the pact between the señor
natural and his vassal has broken down, and as if to illustrate the
levelling of this hierarchy, the two are trampled by a herd of more than
six hundred grunting pigs on their way to market, ‘sin tener respeto a la
autoridad de don Quijote, ni a la de Sancho’ [‘showing no respect for
Don Quixote’s authority, or for Sancho’s’].79 A furious Sancho asks for
his master’s sword to avenge their humiliation by killing some of the
beasts, but Don Quixote, utterly deflated by now, calls this outrage a
punishment from heaven for his defeat at the hands of the Knight of the
White Moon. Sancho will have none of such claptrap and rejects any
sense of a shared fate: ‘pero ¿qué tienen que ver los Panzas con los
Quijotes? [‘but what have the Panzas got to do with the Quixotes?’].80
The knight proposes to vent his sorrows in a love-song for Dulcinea;
Sancho says he prefers to have a good sleep.
In Chapter 69 Cervantes brings the Duke and Duchess back into the
narrative in order to intensify still further the simmering tensions
between knight and squire. The noble couple mount another hoax in
which the maiden Altisidora pretends to have expired of unrequited
love for Don Quixote, and Sancho is said to possess the power to
resurrect her—if only he would allow himself to be pinched and
pricked by duennas and servants at the castle. When, after much
protesting, Sancho appears to succeed in reviving Altisidora, Don
Quixote falls to his knees before the squire in the presence of the entire
ducal court and begs him yet again to flog himself for the sake of
Dulcinea: ‘Agora es tiempo, hijo de mis entrañas, no que escudero mío,
que te des algunos de los azotes que estás obligado a dar por el
desencanto de Dulcinea’ [‘Now is the time, my dearly beloved son—not
merely my squire—to give yourself some of the lashes that you must
undergo to disenchant Dulcinea’].81 But Sancho refuses to humour the
wretched madman. Only when Don Quixote offers to pay him does the
squire relent—but not before negotiating a good price for each stroke:
‘Entraré en mi casa rico y contento, aunque bien azotado’ [‘I’ll walk
into my house a rich and happy man, though a well-lashed one too’].82
Don Quixote is abject in his gratitude, declaring that not only he, but
Dulcinea too, will serve Sancho for the rest of their days: ‘¡Oh Sancho
bendito, oh Sancho amable!…y cuán obligados hemos de quedar
Dulcinea y yo a servirte todos los días que el cielo nos diere de vida!’
[‘O blessed Sancho! O kindly Sancho!…Dulcinea and I shall be under
an obligation to serve you for as long as heaven spares us!’].83 Sancho,
however, goes off into a wood and, rather than whip himself as he had
promised his master, he starts whipping tree-trunks instead.
Several critics have remarked on the increasingly prominent role of
money in the novel, which they see as reflecting the development of
capitalist relations in Spain and the consequent instability of the social
hierarchy.84 Indeed, Cervantes may well have started out with the
purely literary aim of discrediting the libros de caballerías, but in Part II
the contest between knight and squire offers glimpses of a world that
Cervantes must have imagined with disquiet, if not with dread, a world
—so vividly epitomized in the image of the knight kneeling at the feet
of his servant before the ducal court—in which the God-given hierarchy
and the bonds of honour and deference that sustain it, might be
replaced by material self-interest and individual freedom, as evinced in
Sancho’s rebellious cry: ‘I’ll help myself, for I’m my own lord’.
Certainly, the peasant regards his career as a triumph of sorts,
inasmuch as he brings home something like the ‘talego lleno de
doblones’ [‘bag full of doubloons’] with which he had been so
powerfully tempted by the Devil, and the prospect of which had kept
him in the service of a man he knew to be mad. He proudly declares to
his wife: ‘Dineros traigo, que es lo que importa, ganados por mi
industria y sin daño de nadie’; [‘I’ve brought some money back with
me, and that’s what counts, and I’ve earned it with my own wiles,
without doing any harm to anybody’]. And Teresa Panza is satisfied:
‘Traed vos dinero, mi buen marido…y sean ganados por aquí o por allí,
que como quiera que los hayáis ganado no habréis hecho usanza nueva
en el mundo’ [‘So long as you have brought money back, good
husband,…you can have earned it this way or that for all I care—
however you’ve earned it you won’t have started up any new customs
in the world’].85
How different is the fate of Don Quixote. At the start of his journey
home, the defeated knight had reaffirmed his Christian faith in Divine
Providence, and now, as he approaches his village, Cervantes allows
him a certain moral transcendence over Sancho’s mendacity in a scene
which provides some justification for the view of Quixote as the Knight
of Faith, an interpretation favoured notably by Miguel de Unamuno,
and also by W.H. Auden, who regarded him as ‘the portrait of the
Christian saint’.86 When the peasant starts whipping trees and emitting
spine-chilling cries of feigned agony, the madman is moved to pity and
tells him to put off the beatings until they get home. Sancho, however,
insists on carrying on, but Don Quixote becomes so concerned at what
sounds like such awful suffering that he asks him to desist—Dulcinea’s
enchantment can wait for Sancho to recover his strength; he then takes
off his cape and wraps it round Sancho’s shoulders, enabling him to
sleep contentedly until dawn. There is, of course, a touch of comedy in
the scene, arising as ever from the knight’s persistent blindness to the
malicious tricks other characters play on him, but the humour on this
occasion cannot negate the fact of the madman’s willingness to place
Sancho’s health above the one thing he most deeply longs for—the
release of his lady from her spell. The Christian resonance of this
selfless act calls to mind the legend of St Martin of Tours, one of the
four warrior saints praised by Don Quixote shortly after leaving the
Duke’s palace, who cut his cloak in two with his sword and gave half of
it to a beggar in the depths of winter.
With Don Quixote’s pointless sacrifice, Cervantes prepares the
ground for the penultimate chapter, where the knight’s protracted
anguish over the bewitched Dulcinea will culminate in the most
poignant scene in the entire novel. By this time Sancho claims to have
completed the number of lashes prescribed by Merlin, so Don Quixote
scrutinizes every woman they pass on the road to see if it might be
Dulcinea del Toboso, ‘teniendo por infalible no poder mentir las
promesas de Merlín’ [‘because he was absolutely certain that Merlin’s
promises could not be false’].87 As the truth slowly dawns on him, he
becomes so distressed by what he takes to be a bad omen—the sight of
a hare being chased by hounds—that he can hardly bring himself to
mutter in fractured syntax: ‘¡Malum signum! ¡Malum signum! Liebre
huye, galgos la siguen: ¡Dulcinea no parece!’ [‘Malum signum! Malum
signum! Hare flees, greyhounds chase: Dulcinea appears not!’].88 He has
reached the farthest limit of his madness and come up against a void.
And yet, even though his quest has been emptied of meaning, he still
holds to his ridiculous belief in the truth of the books of chivalry: ‘he
was absolutely certain that Merlin’s promises could not be false’. Even
now, he remains a slave to his primary madness, and this helpless state
could in principle last forever, because his unbreakable faith prevents
him from reasoning his way out of the dead-end—the nothingness—to
which his quest has led.
The mad knight of La Mancha has ended up in a situation not much
different from the infinite frustrations suffered by Kafka’s characters, or
from the futile quest for the key to the universe undertaken by Borges’s
librarians in ‘The Library of Babel’. From this modern perspective, the
knight’s fate is quite horrible, but his absurd madness serves to mitigate
the gloom, for Cervantes, as we have seen, was constantly slipping back
and forth between pathos and comedy, and these fluctuations continue
in the last chapters of the novel. Don Quixote still cuts a comical figure
back in his home village: he outlines a ludicrous plan to create a
pastoral idyll and invites the priest and Sansón Carrasco to join him
too, a suggestion that is greeted with gentle raillery from his friends.
Yet, despite these late comic ripples on the surface of the narrative,
Cervantes hints no fewer than three times at the underlying horror of
the madman’s situation, namely, the impasse over Dulcinea, from
which, as we learn, the only escape is death. In the final chapter Don
Quixote falls ill and takes to his bed: ‘o ya fuese de la melancolía que le
causaba el verse vencido o ya por la disposición del cielo, que así lo
ordenaba, se le arraigó una calentura’ [‘either out of the depression
brought on by his defeat or by divine ordination, he was seized by a
fever’].89 His friends attribute his illness to ‘la pesadumbre de verse
vencido y de no ver cumplido su deseo en la libertad y desencanto de
Dulcinea’ [‘dejection at his defeat and the disappointment of his hopes
for Dulcinea’s deliverance and disenchantment’].90 They call a doctor,
who fears the worst: ‘Fue el parecer del médico que melancolías y
desabrimientos le acababan’ [‘The doctor’s opinion was that depression
and despondency were killing him’].91
Cervantes, of course, was no Kafka or Borges, so he allowed Don
Quixote to find salvation from the madness in which he was trapped––
but thanks only to a miracle: the mysterious fever that afflicts the
knight has the effect of dispelling his chivalric mania, enabling Alonso
Quijano to come to his senses at last. The parody is brought to a close
with a moving death-bed scene that reinserts the novel within the
ideological framework of Catholic Spain. Sansón Carrasco, the priest
and barber, Quijano’s niece, and his housekeeper gather round his bed;
a disconsolate and tearful Sancho Panza urges him to get well soon and
return to his adventures, but the old hidalgo is adamant in condemning
the books that had so addled his brains, uttering the famous phrase: ‘En
los nidos de antaño no hay pájaros hogaño’ [‘You won’t find this year’s
birds in last year’s nests’].92 He duly makes his confession, receives the
last sacraments, dictates his will, and then expires.
* * *
Even though Cervantes finally brought a reassuring stability to the
fictional world of Alonso Quijano, albeit through a deus ex machina, he
failed to achieve a comparable reassurance and closure in his own
struggle against the plagiarist Avellaneda. In the Prologue to Part I, he
had granted readers the freedom to judge the work for themselves,
portraying relations between author and reader as an ironic, cloak-and-
dagger game, but in these last chapters we see the playful, carefree
author turn into a jealous proprietor, furiously trying to prevent the
usurper from stealing the credit for his most successful invention.93
Even Cide Hamete Benengeli, the lying Moor who had been conceived
as a breezy parody of the chronicler-magician of the books of chivalry,
is converted into a mouthpiece for a defensive Cervantes, desperate to
turn his reader against Avellaneda’s ‘false’ version. On the very last
page of the novel, Benengeli addresses his pen:
Para mí sola nació don Quijote, y yo para él; él supo obrar y yo escribir,
solos los dos somos para en uno, a despecho y pesar del escritor fingido
y tordesillesco que se atrevió o se ha de atrever a escribir con pluma de
avestruz grosera y mal deliñada las hazañas de mi valeroso caballero,
porque no es carga de sus hombros, ni asunto de su resfriado ingenio.
[For me alone was Don Quixote born, and I for him; it was for him to
act, for me to write; we two are as one, in spite of that false writer from
Tordesillas who has had and may even again have the effrontery to
write with such a coarse and clumsy ostrich quill about my valiant
knight’s deeds, because this is not a burden for his shoulders or a
subject for his torpid wit.]94
Cervantes’s anger spilled over into his Prologue to Part II, which is little
more than a bilious diatribe against Avellaneda. He adopted the
rhetorical strategy of enlisting the reader to convey to the offending
plagiarist a couple of insulting stories about madmen and dogs, one
verging on the scatological, the other mocking the lumpish imagination
of his rival. And, for good measure, he called upon the authority of his
patrons, the Count of Lemos, a mighty nobleman, and the Archbishop
of Toledo, a pillar of the Church: if these great men had favoured him,
despite his straitened circumstances, it was because they esteemed his
‘honour’, his ‘nobility’, and his ‘virtue’. In the end, however, he fell
back on the success of Part I as sufficient guarantee of his superiority in
the craft of fiction: ‘esta segunda parte de Don Quijote que te ofrezco es
cortada del mismo artífice y del mismo paño que la primera’ [‘this
second part of Don Quixote that I’m offering you is cut by the same
craftsman and from the same cloth as the first one’].95 When all was
said and done, it was the authority earned by his powers of invention
that counted, and not the endorsement of any authority external to the
work itself.
Indeed, as posterity was to show, what made the real difference in
this struggle for the ownership of Don Quixote was that Cervantes
understood the value of his invention whereas Avellaneda did not. The
latter’s Don Quixote forsakes his love for Dulcinea and ends up in a
madhouse. Cervantes, on the other hand, saw that Dulcinea was the
embodiment of the knight’s lunatic quest to rise above the everyday
run of things and achieve the glory described in the chivalry books. In
Part II, therefore, he placed this chimerical princess at the very heart of
the novel—thanks to Sancho’s devastating lie, she became the focus of
Don Quixote’s energies and the unifying thread of the episodic
narrative. Even in defeat the ‘real’ Don Quixote will refuse to abjure his
lady. Cast down to the ground by the Knight of the White Moon and
with a lance pointed at his breast, he will insist:
—Dulcinea del Toboso es la más hermosa mujer del mundo y yo el más
desdichado caballero de la tierra, y no es bien que mi flaqueza defraude
esta verdad. Aprieta, caballero, la lanza y quítame la vida, pues me has
quitado la honra.
[‘Dulcinea del Toboso is the most beautiful woman in the world, and I
am the most unfortunate knight in it, and it would not be right for my
weakness to obscure that truth. Drive your lance home, sir knight, and
take away my life, since you have taken away my honour.’]96
The image of the defeated knight uttering these words from within his
shuttered helmet captures the futility of his passion for this figment of
his madness. It is here that we encounter in its purest form the paradox
that Cervantes had been cultivating throughout the course of the
second part: the knight’s heroism lies in his loyalty to ideas that make
him a laughing-stock. This paradox explains why the miraculous
recovery of Catholic orthodoxy in the last chapter of the novel failed to
rob Don Quixote of its modernity. For, in the figure of the grieving
knight, hopelessly impaled on his blind devotion to Dulcinea, Cervantes
had come upon something that possessed a special literary power, a
novel source of wonder (admiratio), which he eventually decided to
draw upon even if it took him beyond his own established beliefs and
beyond the horizons of early-modern Spain. What he achieved in the
end was to distil the general comic atmosphere of the parody into a
timeless tragic moment in which a man is condemned to make a fool of
himself with no hope even of knowing why. This brilliant feat of the
creative imagination is what endowed the knight of La Mancha with a
kind of mythic power in the modern age; this is what made him rise
like a phoenix from the ashes of his futile quest in order to personify
the absurdity—but also the nobility—of living in a world which had
become so impenetrable and strange. And if Cervantes succeeded in
realizing the full potential of Don Quixote’s madness, it was because he
found the courage to pursue the knight’s contest with Sancho Panza
right to the bitter end. His reward was nothing less than the creation of
two of the greatest characters in world literature and the credit in due
course for having laid the foundations of the modern novel.
Acknowledgement
My work for this chapter was sponsored by a Leverhulme Trust Major Research
Fellowship and a Cátedra de Excelencia, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid.
Works Cited
Aristotle. On the Art of Poetry. In Classical Literary Criticism (Harmondsworth:
Penguin, 1965).
Auden, W.H. ‘The Ironic Hero: Some Reflections on Don Quixote’. In Cervantes:
A Collection of Critical Essays, edited by Lowry Nelson, Jr. (Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice Hall, 1969), pp. 73–81.
Auerbach, Erich. ‘The Enchanted Dulcinea’. In Mimesis: The Representation of
Reality in Western Literature, translated by Willard R. Trask (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1974 [1946]), pp. 334–58.
Canavaggio, J. ‘Las bufonadas palaciegas de Sancho Panza’. In Cervantes:
Estudios en la víspera de su centenario, vol. I, edited by K. Reichenberger
(Kassel: Edition Reichenberger, 1994), pp. 237–58.
Cervantes, Miguel de. Don Quijote de la Mancha. Edición del Instituto Cervantes
1605–2005, dirigida por Francisco Rico (Barcelona: Galaxia Gutenberg.
Círculo de Lectores. Centro Para la Edición de los Clásicos Españoles, 2014).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Don Quixote, translated by Edith Grossman (New York:
HarperCollins, 2003).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Don Quixote, translated, Introduction and Notes by John
Rutherford (London: Penguin Books, 2003).
Durán, Manuel. ‘El Quijote a través del prisma de Mikhail Bakhtin: carnaval,
disfraces, escatología y locura’. In Cervantes and the Renaissance, edited by
Michael McGaha (Easton, PA: Juan de la Cuesta, 1980), pp. 71–86.
Egido, Aurora. Cervantes y las puertas del sueño (Barcelona: Promociones y
Publicaciones Universitarias, 1994), Part II.
Flores, R. M. ‘The Role of Cide Hamete in Don Quixote’. Bulletin of Hispanic
Studies 59 (1982): pp. 3–14.
Haley, George. ‘The Narrator in Don Quijote: Maese Pedro’s Puppet Show’.
Modern Language Notes 80 (1965): pp. 146–65.
Hughes, Gethin. ‘The Cave of Montesinos: Don Quixote’s Interpretation and
Dulcinea’s Disenchantment’. Bulletin of Hispanic Studies 54 (1977): pp. 107–
13.
Iffland, James. De fiestas y aguafiestas: risa, locura e ideología en Cervantes y
Avellaneda (Madrid/Frankfurt am Main: Iberoamericana/Vervuert, 1999).
Johnson, Carroll B. Cervantes and the Material World (Urbana and Chicago:
University of Illinois Press, 2000).
Lozano-Renieblas, Isabel and Fernando Romo Feito. Sales Cervantinas: Cervantes
y lo jocoserio (Mexico: Universidad Veracruzana, 2018).
Madariaga, Salvador de. Don Quixote. An Introductory Essay in Psychology
(London: Oxford University Press, 1966 [1935]).
Mancing, Howard. ‘Cide Hamete Benengeli vs. Miguel de Cervantes: The
Metafictional Dialectic of Don Quijote’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes
Society of America 1 (1981): pp. 63–81.
Maravall, José Antonio. Utopía y contrautopía en el Quijote (Santiago de
Compostela: Pico Sacro, 1976).
Martín Jiménez, Alfonso. Cervantes y Pasamonte: La réplica cervantina al Quijote
de Avellaneda (Madrid: Biblioteca Nueva, 2005).
Martínez Mata, Emilio. Cervantes comenta el Quijote (Madrid: Cátedra, 2008).
Pontón, Gonzalo. ‘Indicios de revisión en la Segunda Parte del Quijote’. Anales
Cervantinos 48 (2016): pp. 103–25.
Quint, David. Cervantes’s Novel of Modern Times: A New Reading of ‘Don Quijote’
(Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press, 2003).
Redondo, Augustin. Otra manera de leer el Quijote (Madrid: Castalia, 1998).
Riquer, Martín de. Cervantes, Passamonte y Avellaneda (Barcelona: Sirmio, 1988).
Riley, E.C. ‘Cervantes, Freud, and Psychoanalytic Narrative Theory’. The Modern
Language Review 88 (1993): pp. 1–14.
Riley, E.C. Don Quixote (London: Allen and Unwin, 1986).
Riley, E.C. ‘Metamorphosis, Myth, and Dream in the Cave of Montesinos’. In
Essays on Narrative Fiction in the Iberian Peninsula in Honour of Frank Pierce,
edited by R.B. Tate (Oxford: Dolphin, 1982), pp. 105–19.
Riley, E.C. ‘Three Versions of Don Quixote’. The Modern Language Review 68
(1973): pp. 807–19.
Rivero Iglesias, María del Carmen. ‘El bien común en el Quijote y el gobierno de
Sancho en la ínsula Barataria’. In Autoridad y poder en el Siglo de Oro, edited
by I. Arellano, C. Strosetzki, and E. Williamson (Madrid/Frankfurt am Main:
Iberoamericana/Vervuert, 2009), pp. 117–36.
Williamson, Edwin. ‘Avellaneda y la crisis de autoridad en la Segunda Parte del
Quijote’. In El Segundo ‘Quijote’ (1615): Nuevas interpretaciones cuatro siglos
después (2015), edited by Conxita Domènech and Andrés Lema-Hincapié
(Madrid/Frankfurt am Main: Iberoamericana/Vervuert, 2018), pp. 113–33.
Williamson, Edwin. ‘Crítica del poder y trastornos ideológicos: La estancia de
Don Quijote y Sancho con los Duques’. In La autoridad política y el poder de las
letras en el Siglo de Oro, edited by Jesús María Usunáriz and Edwin Williamson
(Madrid/Frankfurt am Main: Iberoamericana/Vervuert, 2013), pp. 157–81.
Williamson, Edwin. ‘De un “mundo al revés” a un “mundo nuevo”: La
prolongación de la Segunda Parte del Quijote y sus consecuencias’. In
Comentarios a Cervantes: Actas selectas del VIII Congreso Internacional de la
Asociación de Cervantistas, edited by Emilio Martínez Mata and María
Fernández Ferreiro (Asturias: Fundación María Cristina Masaveu Peterson,
2014), pp. 104–21.
Williamson, Edwin. ‘El extraño caso del “grave eclesiástico”: ortodoxia política
y heterodoxia literaria en la Segunda Parte del Quijote’. In Ortodoxia y
heterodoxia en Cervantes, edited by Carmen Rivero Iglesias (Alcalá de Henares:
Centro de Estudios Cervantinos, 2011), pp. 173–83.
Williamson, Edwin. ‘La transformación de Don Quijote y Sancho en la Segunda
Parte’. In Cervantes y los cauces de la novela, edited by Emilio Martínez Mata
(Madrid: Visor, 2013), pp. 33–65.
Williamson, Edwin. ‘The Devil in Don Quixote’. Bulletin of Spanish Studies 92
(2015): pp. 147–66.
Williamson, Edwin. The Half-Way House of Fiction: Don Quixote and Arthurian
Romance (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984).
Williamson, Edwin. ‘The Power-Struggle between Don Quixote and Sancho:
Four Crises in the Development of the Narrative’. Bulletin of Spanish Studies 84
(2007): pp. 837–58.
Wilson, Diana de Armas. ‘Cervantes and the Night Visitors: Dream Work in the
Cave of Montesinos’. In Quixotic Desire: Psychoanalytic Perspectives on
Cervantes, edited by Ruth Anthony El Saffar and Wilson (Ithaca and London:
Cornell University Press, 1993), pp. 59–80.
1 Cervantes, Don Quijote, p. 678; this citation is from the dedication to the
Count of Lemos.
2 My translation; unless otherwise indicated, all quotations from Don
Quixote in English are from the Rutherford translation. In subsequent footnotes,
pagereferences to this English edition will be given immediately after page-
references to the Spanish.
3 For a fuller discussion of the self-reflexive relation between Parts I and II,
and of the trope of ‘the story within the story’, see Martínez Mata, pp. 85–97.
4 See Riley, ‘Three Versions…’.
5 For example, see Riley, Don Quixote, for whom in Part II the knight’s
‘mental health has in an important way improved’ (p. 93).
6 Flores, pp. 5 and 12, note 9.
7 See Mancing, and Martínez Mata, pp. 23–5; the beginnings of Chapters 5,
24, and 27 are good examples of the interplay between the three roles.
8 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.44, p. 1070; Don Quixote, p. 776.
9 See Chapter 5 of this volume.
10 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.10, p. 767; p. 546.
11 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.10, p. 771; pp. 548–9.
12 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.10, p. 774; p. 551.
13 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.10, p. 768; pp. 546–7.
14 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.10, p. 774; p. 551.
15 For a fuller discussion than is possible here, see Williamson, ‘La
transformación…’, and ‘De un “mundo…’.
16 Auerbach, p. 339.
17 Auerbach, p. 343.
18 Auerbach, pp. 340 and 339. Please note that the order of the quotes in this
sentence is as follows in Auerbach: ‘surmounts the shock’, p. 340 and ‘sad,
bitter, etc.’, p. 339.
19 ‘By an episodic plot I mean one in which the sequence of the episodes is
neither probable nor necessary…A complex action is one in which the change
[of fortune] is accompanied by a discovery or a reversal, or both. These should
develop out of the very structure of the plot, so that they are the inevitable or
probable consequence of what has gone before’ (Aristotle, p. 45).
20 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.10, p. 773; pp. 549–50.
21 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.11, p. 775; p. 551.
22 See Lozano-Renieblas and Romo Feito, who argue that Cervantes’s fiction
tends progressively to combine comic and serious themes.
23 See Chapter 5 of this volume, ‘The Prologue to Part I’, pp. 112–15.
24 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.13, p. 795; p. 566.
25 See Williamson, ‘The Power-Struggle…’
26 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.15, p. 816; p. 581.
27 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.16, p. 820; p. 584.
28 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.17, p. 839; p. 598.
29 For literary antecedents and influences, see Egido, especially the chapters
‘La cueva de Montesinos y la tradición erasmista de ultratumba’ and ‘La de
Montesinos y otras cuevas’.
30 See Riley, ‘Metamorphosis, Myth and Dream…’, p. 109.
31 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.23, p. 901; p. 645.
32 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.23, p. 902; p. 646.
33 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.23, p. 903; p. 646.
34 See Wilson and Riley, ‘Cervantes, Freud…’.
35 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.24, p. 905; p. 648.
36 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.25, p. 922 (my translation).
37 See Haley.
38 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.29, p. 954; p. 687.
39 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.30, p. 955.
40 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.31, p. 962; p. 693.
41 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.32, p. 973; p. 702.
42 See Williamson, ‘El extraño caso del “grave eclesiástico”…’.
43 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.35, p. 1005; p. 727.
44 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.35, p. 1014; p. 733.
45 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.35, p. 1014; p. 733.
46 See Canavaggio for Sancho’s antics.
47 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.46, p. 1096.
48 See Williamson, ‘Crítica del poder…’.
49 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.52, p. 1150; p. 839.
50 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.45, p. 1087; p. 789.
51 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.51, p. 1150; p. 838; see also Rivero Iglesias.
52 Maravall, p. 226.
53 Maravall, p. 220.
54 See, for example, Redondo, Iffland, Durán.
55 Redondo, pp. 471, 472, and 472–3.
56 Iffland, p. 455.
57 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.53, p. 1163; p. 849.
58 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.54, p. 1170; p. 854.
59 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.58, p. 1198; p. 876.
60 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.60, p. 1220. The translation is from Grossman, p.
851.
61 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.60, p. 1221; p. 893.
62 Madariaga, p. 6.
63 See Williamson, ‘The Power-Struggle…’.
64 Riquer has produced the most convincing hypothesis as to Avellaneda’s
real identity.
65 See Williamson, ‘Avellaneda y la crisis de autoridad…’, pp. 125–32.
66 Martín Jiménez has controversially argued that Cervantes had prior
knowledge of Avellaneda’s sequel in manuscript and wrote the whole of his own
Part II in rivalrous imitation of the plagiarist.
67 See Pontón for textual traces of these revisions.
68 See Williamson, The Half-Way House of Fiction, pp. 188–90.
69 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.65, p. 1273.
70 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.65, p. 1274; p. 933.
71 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.65, p. 1274; p. 934.
72 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.66, p. 1275; p. 934.
73 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.66, p. 1275; p. 935.
74 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.66, p. 1275–6; p. 935.
75 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.66, p. 1278; p. 936.
76 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.67, p. 1283; p. 940.
77 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.67, p. 1286; p. 943.
78 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.68, p. 1288–9; p. 944–5.
79 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.68, p. 1290; p. 946.
80 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.68, p. 1291; p. 946.
81 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.69, p. 1299; p. 953.
82 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.71, p. 1311; p. 962.
83 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.71, p. 1312; p. 962.
84 See Hughes, Johnson, pp. 15–36, and Quint, pp. 158–62.
85 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.73, p. 1325; p. 973.
86 Auden, p. 73.
87 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.72, p. 1322; p. 970.
88 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.73, p. 1323; p. 971.
89 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.74, p. 1328; p. 975.
90 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.74, p. 1329; p. 976.
91 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.74, p. 1329; p. 976.
92 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.74, p. 1333; p. 979.
93 For a fuller discussion see Williamson, ‘Avellaneda y…’, pp. 117–20 and
129–32.
94 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.74, p. 1336; p. 981.
95 Cervantes, Don Quijote, Prólogo, p. 677; p. 486.
96 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.64, p. 1267; p. 928.
Chapter 7
Quixote and Counter-Quixote
The Cervantes-Avellaneda Duel and Its Impact
on the History of the Novel
James Iffland
Boston University
On waking up one day in the summer of 1614, Cervantes soon found
himself confronting yet another of those unpleasant surprises that life
had often served him up. With much of Part II of Don Quixote already
composed, he discovered that someone writing under the pseudonym of
Alonso Fernández de Avellaneda had just published his own
continuation of our hero’s adventures. Titled the Segundo tomo del
ingenioso hidalgo don Quijote de la Mancha and allegedly published in
the city of Tarragona, it picks up where Cervantes’s Part I left off, with
Don Quixote eventually embarking on a journey to Zaragoza to
participate in the tournament mentioned in the latter’s final pages.
To this very day, the precise identity of Avellaneda remains
unknown. One of the great mysteries in the history of world literature,
it has generated hundreds of pages of speculation on the part of
Cervantes scholars going back centuries. Indeed, the search for the ‘real
Avellaneda’ has taken on the aura of a detective novel—a veritable
‘whodunit’. Indeed, the better part of the critical attention paid to the
Segundo tomo has centred almost exclusively on the issue of
Avellaneda’s identity.1
This tendency has dovetailed with the virtually ritualized
denigration of Avellaneda on two fronts. The first is essentially moral
or ethical; the anonymous author was clearly someone who wanted to
do damage to Cervantes (as clearly enunciated in the prologue), and in
that role, he has become a certified villain within the collective
imaginary of the Cervantes Establishment.2 The second tendency
centres on aesthetic issues. Not only was Avellaneda a ‘bad person’, he
was also a bad writer. Critic after critic denounces Avellaneda for
failing miserably in his attempt to recreate Cervantes’s mastery. He is
called on the carpet for not being able to reproduce the psychological
richness of the two protagonists, for not being able to recreate
Cervantes’s sly irony and sparkling sense of humour, etc.
It was only in the middle of the twentieth century that Cervantes
scholarship began to go beyond the vituperative attacks on Avellaneda
and to think about other issues raised by the Segundo tomo. Quite
surprisingly, few critics had looked at the work as potentially
significant material for reconstructing the reception of the Quixote at
the moment of its appearance. One of the primordial ongoing debates
within Cervantes studies is whether the Quixote embodies a dissident or
even subversive perspective on the Spain of his day: its socio-political
and economic structure, its religion, its national values, its imperial
project, etc. This reading has become almost canonical since the advent
of the Romantic approach to the work in the early nineteenth century,
as studied so masterfully by Anthony Close (The Romantic…). Prior to
then, most readings, while occasionally admitting the presence of some
social criticism, saw the work as an essentially admonitory tale in
which Don Quixote himself is the butt of Cervantes’s attacks—that is,
for his absurd attempt to resurrect knight errantry, for his systematic
misrecognition of reality, for his unbridled ‘enthusiasm’, etc. The
protagonist’s recovery of his sanity and subsequent denunciation of his
entire project are looked upon as a ‘happy ending’. Even today, many
readers of the Quixote embrace a variant of this reading, particularly as
regards the intrinsic suitability of an ending in which the hero finally
comes to ‘know himself’ and to embrace the Catholic faith.
The big question that looms over this debate is whether Cervantes’s
contemporaries detected any of the dissident elements that are
highlighted in the interpretations of the Quixote of the past two
centuries. Traces of reactions to the work in the early seventeenth
century are not as abundant as one might think, and as has been
pointed by Paolo Cherchi, those that have been found largely tend to be
lukewarm or noncommittal.3 Cervantes’s fellow writers begrudgingly
recognize the work’s popularity, but then are dismissive regarding its
ultimate literary significance. No one openly attacks it on ideological
grounds, as one would expect if it contained a strong heterodox streak.4
How then can those scholars who embrace the notion of an
‘oppositional Cervantes’ protect themselves from accusations of
projecting back on the Quixote a socio-political dimension it simply
does not have?
Stephen 
Gilman 
made 
a 
significant 
contribution 
to 
the
reconstruction of the contemporary reception of the work precisely
through a close study of Avellaneda’s apocryphal continuation. He
stressed that here we have a whole novel, written by a strict
contemporary, that picks up where Part I left off. Might the text be
scrutinized to determine how at least one sector of the reading public
decoded the work from an ideological perspective?
Gilman’s answer is resolutely affirmative. He argues that
Avellaneda’s continuation is an attack on a work that was perceived to
be too close to strains of Renaissance thought and sensibility.
Avellaneda writes, according to Gilman, from the perspective of
Counter-Reformation Catholicism, which at the time was striving to put
a lid on the unbridled socio-cultural effervescence unleashed during the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries by a plethora of humanists, artists, and
writers, much of which culminated in an emphasis on the individual
human being and his capacity for agency in this world, perceived as
worthwhile in and of itself and not simply as a grim antechamber for
the life beyond. The Segundo tomo has its roots deeply anchored in the
soil of post-Tridentine doctrinal writings—to the point where Gilman
even suggests that behind the pseudonym ‘Avellaneda’ hides a member
of the Dominican order. The distinguished American Hispanist uses as
evidence elements that range from the fact that we find Don Quixote
reading the Flos Sanctorum at the start of the Segundo tomo to the
number of times the rosary is mentioned, from the prominent role of
the clergyman Mosén Valentín to the moralizing content of the two
interpolated novellas, El rico desesperado and Los felices amantes.
Additionally, Gilman studies the way in which Don Quixote and
Sancho are presented very differently from what we find in Cervantes,
with both becoming buffoonish, oversimplified avatars of their former
selves, constantly subjected to broad stroke, slapstick comedy. Gilman
strives to reconcile the crude comicality of the main characters with
what he considers to be the doctrinal basis of the work—an approach I
find unconvincing.5 Much more to the point is his highlighting of the
role of characters belonging to the aristocracy. Gilman suggests that the
Segundo tomo aligns itself with a ‘Society’ that is perceived as being
fundamentally well-designed and just, which is precisely why Don
Quixote is presented as a disruptive lunatic with no redeeming qualities
whatsoever. There would seem to be somewhat of a contradiction
between Gilman’s simultaneous reading of the work as the product of a
theological matrix that resoundingly rejects ‘el Mundo’ [the World] in
all of its manifestations, on the one hand, and on the other, his
emphasis on a ‘Society’ that is well-made and competently presided
over by the landed aristocracy.
As noted above, to the degree that scholars were interested at all in
possible ideological factors behind Avellaneda’s project, Gilman’s study
was virtually the only one cited for nearly fifty years. In 1999, the
author of these lines published De fiestas y aguafiestas: risa, locura e
ideología en Cervantes y Avellaneda, an in-depth study, which also strives
to identify the forces responsible for the gaping differences between the
two Quixotes. I agree with Gilman that Avellaneda was a good reader of
the 1605 work, picking up on oppositional resonances that are vexingly
difficult to denounce because the work is fundamentally a ‘libro de
burlas’ [a funny book], one whose comicality, moreover, is not openly
satirical in nature. Where I strongly diverge from Gilman is on the issue
of the connection between the Segundo tomo and Counter-Reformation
Catholicism and the notion that Avellaneda was probably a cleric.
While there is, in fact, a religious dimension to the work, it does not
differ greatly from that found in the writings of most secular writers of
the age.6 The Segundo tomo is definitely reactionary, but that
ideological vector has its origin not in theology so much as it does in
the socio-political and economic interests of noblemen deeply
concerned by the destabilization being unleashed in the early modern
period by nascent capitalism. The fifteenth and sixteenth centuries in
Europe saw a ‘revolution in rising expectations’, aided and abetted by
Renaissance humanism—a ‘revolution’ which had as one of its
consequences the increasing rejection of feudal socio-economic and
political structures that required commoners, both the peasantry and
the urban middle classes, to stay in the social niche into which they
were born. Maravall has closely studied the case of Spain within this
general European panorama, chronicling the growing fears of the ruling
class and its attempt to reverse the tide that challenged its many
privileges. Needless to say, the Church, too, became an eager partner in
this whole reactionary campaign, largely through the dissemination of
the religious doctrine studied by Gilman. But aristocratic ideology had
its own specificity, and it is that ideology that I feel is far more present
in the Segundo tomo than the theological tenets of the Counter-
Reformation.
In De fiestas…I strive to identify what bothered Avellaneda about the
Quixote of 1605 and how he takes systematic countermeasures to
neutralize it—but again, from his class position rather than from an
institutional affiliation with the Church. The anonymous author centres
in on issues of both social and physical mobility, deeply interconnected
at the time, as people, particularly the peasantry, had to be able to
move to wherever the best economic opportunities might be found.
Likewise unsettling for him is the specific variant of madness embodied
by Cervantes’s protagonist. Even if he does not perceive the Erasmian
strain that runs through it,7 he would nevertheless be bothered by the
mechanism of reversibility (that is, Don Quixote as a loco-cuerdo [sane
madman] or loco-sabio [wise madman]). Similarly, Sancho’s own
variety of reversibility—his status as a tonto-listo [clever dolt]—would
be an irritant for someone convinced that a peasant had to ‘know his
place’ in society and that he should stay in it, quite literally, working
the land that belonged to his master.8
The interaction between the two forms of reversibility unleashes a
strangely worrisome form of energy that palpitates throughout the
pages of Part I. Don Quixote is a knight errant, and in that capacity, he
sets his squire in motion as well, taking him off the land as a day
labourer, precisely at a time in which Spain was suffering a huge
demographic crisis with devastating effects in its all-important
agricultural sector.9 And after unlawfully giving himself a class
promotion (mere hidalgos were not entitled to use ‘Don’), he proceeds
to tell his illiterate peasant neighbour that he will soon make him a
governor. He does so while declaring himself to be a completely
autonomous entity, showing little, if any, allegiance to either secular or
religious authorities.
All of this, of course, is completely laughable for the reader of the
time. And here is the crux of the issue: yes, Don Quixote is a ‘funny
book’,10 a libro de burlas. But laughter is a complex phenomenon, as
many of those variants are not innocent at all. Laughter can be used as
much as a tool of social control as it can be deployed in projects of
liberation.11 It is precisely in the area of comicality and laughter that
the great divide between the Quixote of 1605 and the Segundo tomo is
most evident. In the latter, comicality is deployed in a socially
conservative manner, whereas in the former, it has the reverse effect,
destabilizing social and ideological norms in a multitude of ways.12
Following the pioneering observations of Mikhail Bakhtin, and
subsequent analysis by Cervantes scholars such as Augustin Redondo
(Otra manera…), I argue that the undergirding ‘logic’ of both parts of
the Quixote is that characteristic of popular-festive culture as seen most
vividly in the celebration of pre-Lenten Carnival. In it we find
embodied a stunning gamut of symbolic inversions, all of which can be
synthesized under the rubric of the ‘world-upside-down’—that is, a
world in which all traditional hierarchical relationships (class, gender,
age, political, anatomical) are turned on their head, either through
imaginary representations (in art) or through festive practices.13 The
archetypal instance in the latter case is the Roman Saturnalia in which
masters and slaves exchanged places. The festival invoked the mythical
reign of the god Saturn in which material abundance, peace, and
freedom prevailed (see the many comments on this festival in Bakhtin).
Indeed, in all carnivalesque practices a strong utopian impulse
prevails. Though these festivities all occur within strictly limited time
periods, after which things ‘return to normal’ (leading some social
scientists to define them as ‘escape valves’ whose ultimate effect is to
preserve the status quo), there have been many historical instances in
which they have spilled over into actual revolutionary praxis.14 Even
when they do not do so, they still embody within them images of a
different sociopolitical and economic order—literally, forms of
revolution.15 A laughable monarch is installed at the beginning of
Carnival, and after the days of feasting and revelry, that roi pour rire is
dethroned—often ‘killed’—in risibly degrading fashion. A year later,
the king returns, presides over the festival once again, only to be
overthrown once again.16
A defining feature of Carnival is, of course, laughter, but laughter of
a very special sort.17 Bakhtin defines it as an essentially subversive
laughter, one which frees us from fear, from the paralyzing awe
induced by religious and political authority and their multiple
apparatuses of control.18 Carnival is full of ferocious parodies: official
values of every sort are debased in ways that spark ‘belly laughter’,
almost literally.
Part of carnivalesque inversion is modelled on the human body; the
bodily lower stratum (as Bakhtin terms it)—that is, the gut, the sexual
organs, the feet, etc.—takes precedence over the ‘higher’ parts, such as
the head, the heart, the hands, etc. ‘High culture’ is symbolically
submerged in that lower sphere of the body, where it is humiliated and
destroyed, but also suffused with new, more vibrant life (remember:
here is where the sexual organs and the womb are located).19
Bakhtin suggests that Cervantes belonged to a select group of
Renaissance 
authors 
(also 
including 
Rabelais, 
Erasmus, 
and
Shakespeare) who absorbed many aspects of popular-festive culture
and suffused their works with it in many ways. The laughter they
induce is related to that culture, but it is brought to another, more
transcendent level. He terms it ‘Renaissance laughter’. From these
authors’ perspective:
laughter has a deep philosophical meaning; it is one of the essential
forms of the truth concerning the world as a whole, concerning history
and man; it is a peculiar point of view relative to the world, the world
as seen anew, no less (and perhaps more) profoundly than when seen
from the serious standpoint. Therefore, laughter is just as admissible in
great literature, posing universal problems, as seriousness. Certain
essential aspects of the world are accessible only to laughter.20
The laughter represented within the Quixote is very much within the
parameters of Carnival/Renaissance laughter.21 It goes in all directions,
from the top down, yes, but also vice versa (starting with the laughter
Don Quixote incites in the prostitutes sitting at the door of the inn).
The textual references to laughter serve as signposts pointing toward
the type of laughter cultivated by the work in its totality.22
And here we find an important point of departure for analyzing the
fundamental differences between the Segundo tomo and Cervantes’s Don
Quixote. If one looks at the laughter represented in Avellaneda’s work,
it always comes from members of the higher strata of society (typically
the so-called ‘caballeros de buen gusto’) and is directed toward the
lower strata. Moreover, it is systematic in nature: the narrator always
highlights how Don Quixote and Sancho cause laughter in those who
interact with them. Nothing funny happens in the work without
someone being present to laugh at the protagonists. Moreover, it is a
laughter that largely functions as a form of social control, one in which
an ‘in-group’ distinguishes itself from an ‘out-group’ it is sanctioning in
a certain way.23
This is where the comicality of the Segundo tomo ties into its
ideological function. Avellaneda has perceived the ways in which the
Quixote challenges many aspects of the dominant ideology of imperial
Spain and its religious underpinning, but he sees that this effect is
achieved through laughter. Don Quixote is mad; Sancho is a fool, right?
So where is the danger?
The slipperiness of the Quixote’s subversive quality is precisely what
irritates Avellaneda most deeply, and he proceeds to counteract it by
mobilizing another, very different, variety of the comic. It is one in
which there is no room for ambiguity; Don Quixote and Sancho are
uniformly ridiculous, and their ridiculousness stems largely from the
absurd nature of their whole project. A mere hidalgo who thinks he can
rise to the highest echelons of the nobility, or even royalty, through
heroic deeds? Absurd! And even more so the notion that a mere
peasant can become a governor.
Part of the unsettling complexity of the two protagonists in
Cervantes’s work is their aforementioned reversibility—that is, their
respective conditions as loco-cuerdo and tonto-listo. In De fiestas…I
strove to show that Don Quixote’s form of madness is related to what is
referred to as ‘traditional folly’—that is, a form of mental derangement
in which the mad person is perceived as having access to the divine, to
higher forms of knowledge not available to ‘sane’ people.24 It is the
type of madness crystallized by Erasmus in his famous Praise of Folly in
which certain types of madness are condemned but others are
presented as having admirable qualities—even a kind of creative force
in the world. This is a view of madness that comes under attack just
about at this time as Europe moves toward Modernity and the forms of
social organization that characterize it. Madness is progressively seen
as simply a form of illness and a public nuisance. Whereas before, the
insane were allowed to roam the streets, starting around the beginning
of the seventeenth century, they were rounded up and confined to
institutions designed largely to prevent them from causing public
disruption.25
This, precisely, is what happens to Avellaneda’s protagonist. After he
has served his purpose as a form of entertainment for the aristocrats (a
subject to which we will return), he is confined to the Casa del Nuncio,
a famous insane asylum located in Toledo. In that sense, Avellaneda’s
formulation of Don Quixote’s madness leans toward the incipiently
modern understanding of the phenomenon. But in this case, it is
conjoined with an unambiguous ideological objective: eliminating the
unsettling emancipatory resonances surrounding Don Quixote’s folly.
No more reversibility, at all.
Maurice Molho was a pioneer in elucidating the subversive quality
of Sancho’s own variant of reversibility, that is, as tonto-listo. The
brilliant critic showed how Sancho is built on a folkloric archetype,
found throughout the world, in which the fool, through his own
foolishness, ends up getting the best of his social superiors.
In Avellaneda, Sancho’s reversibility is also erased. He is presented
solely as a dolt, a country bumpkin who can only serve as the butt of
jokes by his social betters. Whereas Sancho’s robust love of food and
general earthiness ties into the logic of Carnival and its liberating
celebration of the flesh, in Avellaneda his gluttony serves largely as an
entertaining spectacle for the aristocrats.26 Indeed, his ‘talent’ in this
area is such that his final fate is to be a buffoon in the household of a
high-ranking nobleman in the court. His own latent subversiveness is
rendered inoffensive as he is ‘taken off the road’ and comfortably
transformed into a luxury item.27
What smooths the way for the respective ‘final solutions’ is the fact
that virtually all of the episodes in the Segundo tomo take place not in
the sprawling countryside of La Mancha but within a string of urban
contexts.28 Generally speaking, it is easier to be crazy out in the wide-
open spaces than in city streets, where one is constantly subject to the
gaze of ‘normal people’ and likely to bump up against social regulations
duly enforced by municipal security agents. This is precisely what
occurs in the case of Avellaneda’s protagonists, who frequently run
afoul of the authorities or become easy targets for nobles seeking
entertainment.
Beside the awful surprise Cervantes suffers on discovering that
someone has come out with an apocryphal continuation, our author has
to have been horrified by what had happened to his main characters.
Not only had they been kidnapped, but their identities had been
changed! And they had been changed in a way that undermined the
original work’s very essence. Independently of whether Cervantes had
set out to produce a dissident text, he had to perceive that Avellaneda
had carried out an open ideological agenda. The laughs were still there,
but not the type Cervantes had decided to cultivate in programmatic
fashion.29
Apropos of prologues, Avellaneda’s is a singularly venomous
exemplar of the attacks that were frequent among literary figures of the
day. As Gómez Canseco has recently pointed out, there is much about
the Segundo tomo that is reminiscent of Spain’s literary academies.30 In
them, writers socialized with their peers, jockeying for favour but also
very aggressively settling accounts, at times to the point where physical
violence could erupt. Avellaneda’s prologue combines vicious personal
assaults (centring on Cervantes’s age and physical disability) along with
an attempt to curry favour with Lope de Vega.31 Avellaneda had
detected Cervantes’s own exercise in academy-style backbiting in the
1605 prologue, where he goes after Lope in ways that would have been
perfectly recognizable within contemporary literary circles.32 Then
there is the very well-articulated attack on Lope’s entire theatrical
practice in the discussion between the priest and the canon of Toledo in
I.48. Avellaneda had felt himself under attack in that prologue; he
refers to Cervantes’s use of ‘sinónomos voluntarios’ to allude to those
he is jocosely wounding.33
There has been much speculation on whether Avellaneda was a
member of Lope’s circle of friends and followers. Indeed, Lope himself
has been put forward as a candidate for authorship of the Segundo tomo,
or at least as a possible instigator.34 Gómez Canseco rejects the notion
that the apocryphal continuation was a ‘hatchet job’ personally
commissioned by the ‘Phoenix’, but he is very sympathetic towards the
hypothesis that Avellaneda was, indeed, somehow related to Lope’s
retinue.35 It is a position I find very plausible, considering certain
theatrical elements present in the Segundo tomo, as Gómez Canseco has
so perceptively observed.36
That Cervantes himself felt deeply wounded by Avellaneda’s words
is evident in his prologue to Part II. He takes up the slurs, one by one,
and after responding to them, sends back volleys of his own. Among
the more salient aspects of Cervantes’s response is his highlighting that
his physical defect was the result of his participation in what was
perhaps the most important battle of the sixteenth century.37 His
distinguished military service was something of which he was
extremely proud,38 and for his wounded hand to be used as an excuse
for mockery had made his blood boil.
The other highly significant aspect of Cervantes’s response to
Avellaneda’s prologue is how he deals with what constituted a thinly
veiled threat by the anonymous author. When defending Lope,
Avellaneda refers to the playwright’s position within the Spanish
Inquisition.39 Lope was, indeed, a ‘familiar’ of that notorious
institution: that is, an official collaborator. When Avellaneda alludes to
Lope’s inquisitional link, it serves as a de facto warning. And if the
anonymous author has, indeed, picked up potentially heterodox
resonance within the Quixote, the threat is even more pointed.
Cervantes hears the message loud and clear, and responds with his
own riposte. Brimming over with acidic irony, he says that of course it
would have never occurred to him to attack someone associated with
the Santo Oficio [Holy Office]. Such a thing would have been madness.
But in feigning apprehensive respect, he also delivers a devastating
blow under the guise of what would appear to be a great compliment;
he refers to the admiration he feels for Lope, among other things,
because of his ‘ocupación continua y virtuosa’ (II.Prologue, p. 674) [‘his
unceasing, virtuous virtuosity’ (p. 484)]. When Cervantes writes this,
Lope is an ordained priest who still maintains his notoriously active
love life. The praise proffered drips outright sarcasm.
While managing to maintain a certain aplomb in his initial remarks,
Cervantes ends up launching barrages that make it clear that he is
furious. He tells his readers that if they ever meet the coward hiding
behind the pseudonym, they should tell him that he does not feel
himself to be aggrieved, and that he understands what it is like to
succumb to the devil’s temptations. In this case, it is the temptation
that makes you believe that you have the talent necessary to write a
book that will make you rich and famous.40
To exemplify his point, Cervantes goes on to narrate two anecdotes
about madmen, and here is where he takes the gloves off. The first one
compares Avellaneda to a madman who was very proud of himself for
having the ability to inflate a dog by inserting a hollowed piece of cane
into its anus and then blowing on it.41 The composition of the Segundo
tomo is thus presented as being analogous to the madman’s dog-
inflating prowess. The second madman has a penchant for dropping
heavy rocks on unsuspecting dogs. He makes the mistake of doing his
mean trick to the dog of a cap-maker, who proceeds to give him a
beating while repeating the phrase ‘Perro, ladrón, ¿a mi podenco? ¿No
viste, cruel, que era podenco mi perro?’ [You dog! You wretch! You’d
hurt my whippet? Couldn’t you see, you monster, that my dog’s a
whippet].42 From that point on, the madman always holds back at the
last moment before dropping his rock, repeating the same phrase—‘Éste
es podenco: ¡guarda!’ [This one’s a whippet: stay clear!]43—regardless
of the type of dog. Cervantes suggests that having failed so miserably in
his attempt to write a continuation of the Quixote, Avellaneda will also
hold back from dropping his ‘rock’ (i.e. shabby ‘ingenio’) on another
literary work. Such direct assaults are unusual for Cervantes, who
always tends to prefer sly obliqueness when settling literary accounts.
His willingness to be so brazen and vulgar shows precisely how angry
he must have felt.
The question then arises as to how Cervantes will channel that anger
when addressing Avellaneda’s sabotage beyond the paratextual level.
For years Cervantes scholars assumed, almost axiomatically, that our
author learned of the Segundo tomo while writing Chapter 59,44 and it is
only from that point on that he begins to take countermeasures. This is
a rather naïve way of understanding the process of literary creation.
Cervantes is brought to a screeching halt on learning of the apocryphal
continuation, and then immediately begins to incorporate references to
it in the very episode that he is in the process of composing.45 It is also
assumed by many scholars that Cervantes did not go back to rewrite
earlier parts of Part II after learning of the Segundo tomo. This view has
as its premise that Cervantes had very little time to do any major
revisions before presenting his manuscript to Robles, pressured, as he
was, to get it out before the Segundo tomo was able to take root
completely. Cervantes had between five and eight months, roughly, to
rework his manuscript.46 This is ample time not only to write the last
chapters but also to introduce changes of one sort or another. Several
scholars, including José Manuel Martín Morán, Luis Gómez Canseco,
and the author of these lines, have pointed to passages, or even
complete episodes, well prior to Chapter 59, that appear to be direct
responses to the Segundo tomo.47
Notable similarities between Cervantes’s and Avellaneda’s texts have
led to a variety of hypotheses over the years. According to some
scholars, Avellaneda gained access to portions of Cervantes’s
manuscript, and proceeded to plagiarize them. Conversely, some argue
that Cervantes had read Avellaneda’s text in advance of its publication,
and that he is the one doing the plagiarizing.
I completely agree with Riquer and Gómez Canseco48 that there is
no reason to speculate about purloined manuscripts, on either side of
the equation. Any overlapping comes about on the basis of Cervantes
acquiring a copy of the Segundo tomo after its publication. With death
staring him in the face, Cervantes went about writing the final chapters
of Part II, introducing changes, as well, in chapters already written (all
the while pressing forward with the Persiles).
In De fiestas…I have argued that Cervantes’s response to the Segundo
tomo begins, in essence, before he even learned of its existence.49 I say
this because he simply takes up where he left off at the end of Part I,
deploying the same variety of subversive humour, putting into motion
the same mechanisms of reversibility, reenergizing the logic of Carnival,
etc. Without knowing anything about the threat on the horizon,
Cervantes ‘responds’ to it pre-emptively by keeping true to his original
conceptualization.
After reading the Segundo tomo, however, our author proceeds not
only to include overt references to it but also to reinforce even further
key aspects of that conceptualization. Having noted how Avellaneda
removes the rich reversibility of his two protagonists, Cervantes
proceeds to incorporate passages and episodes that take Don Quixote
beyond the condition of a loco-cuerdo, turning him progressively into a
loco-sabio.50 The interaction between his two facets becomes more and
more convoluted, rendering the task of categorizing him almost
impossible. Sancho, too, evolves from his condition as tonto-listo to
tonto-sabio. The zenith of his evolution is his performance as governor
of Barataria, during which he thwarts the attempt to render him a
buffoon by governing in a brilliantly judicious manner—to such a
degree that his legislation was adopted permanently in the village that
served as Barataria.51
Having seen the degree to which Avellaneda tames the
carnivalesque pulse of Part I by putting the ludic/festive activity under
the control of the aristocracy, Cervantes responds by ramping up the
manifestations of authentic popular-festive culture and its logic of the
world-upside-down. This is seen most dramatically, perhaps, in the
aforementioned episodes dedicated to Barataria, where besides
manifesting himself as a wise fool, Sancho presides as a Carnival king.52
While the episodes in the ducal palace would seem to be strongly
reminiscent of the ‘fiesta confiscada’ seen in the Segundo tomo, there are
many aspects of the action that lean heavily in the direction of popular-
festive culture, including the fact that it is the retinue of servants who
design and implement the elaborate burlas, not the Duke and Duchess.
The latter fall into the spirit of the festivities to such a degree that the
Duke even manages to provoke the departure of the ‘grave eclesiástico’
[grave churchman]53 who serves as a ‘Lenten’ foil to the Carnival spirit
that emerges in the palace.
Similarly, Avellaneda’s urban strategy is flipped over by Cervantes
as he inserts Don Quixote into the streets of Barcelona. He arrives not
under the aegis of ‘caballeros de buen gusto’ but under that of Roque
Guinart, the Catalan bandolero hunted by the Spanish state.54 Indeed,
Don Quixote and Roque have struck up a friendship.55 Fundamental
differences mark Antonio Moreno’s burlas and those designed by
Avellaneda’s aristocrats. Don Antonio shares Don Quixote with the
inhabitants of Barcelona rather than keeping him for the exclusive
enjoyment of the nobility. Don Quixote’s role as Carnival monarch
reaches its zenith when he and Sancho are saluted by the Spanish navy
in the city’s harbour.56
As noted above, Avellaneda had seized upon Sancho’s carnivalesque
fondness for food and transformed it into a buffoonish spectacle for the
nobility. Among the aspects of Avellaneda’s continuation that are
targeted for criticism in the conversation between our protagonists and
the guests in the inn is precisely the portrayal of Sancho as an
unmitigated glutton.57 Cervantes strives to refocus his character along
popular-festive lines through several moments in Part II, perhaps most
significantly during the ‘Bodas de Camacho’ [Camacho’s wedding]
episode in II.20. Here Sancho’s ‘belliness’ is highlighted to the
maximum, but all within a festive context of gargantuan proportions,
almost literally.58 Again, this could have been an unconscious ‘pre-
emptive response’ on Cervantes’s part. On the other hand, it, too, could
be one of the passages Cervantes composed once he saw what had
happened to the squire in the Segundo tomo.
Returning now to those aspects of Cervantes’s response to
Avellaneda that appear explicitly in Part II, in Chapter 59 Don Quixote
and Sancho overhear a conversation between two gentlemen in the
room next door at the inn where they are staying. To his great
astonishment, Don Quixote hears them expressing negative sentiments
regarding the continuation of his adventures: ‘“¿Para qué quiere
vuestra merced, señor don Juan, que leamos estos disparates, si el que
hubiere leído la primera parte de la historia de don Quijote de la
Mancha no es posible que pueda tener gusto en leer esta segunda?”’
[‘Why do you want us to read all that nonsense, Don Juan? Nobody
who has read the first part of the history of Don Quixote de la Mancha
can possibly derive any pleasure from reading this second part’].59 Don
Juan is particularly upset by the fact that Don Quixote is no longer in
love with Dulcinea: ‘“Lo que a mí en éste más desplace es que pinta a
don Quijote ya desenamorado de Dulcinea del Toboso’” [‘What I most
dislike about this one is that it describes Don Quixote as no longer in
love with Dulcinea del Toboso’].60 That is, indeed, a major difference
that Avellaneda establishes from the very beginning of the Segundo
tomo; our protagonist is transformed into the ‘Caballero Desamorado’
[the Knight No Longer in Love],61 largely because of an insulting
response to a love letter he sent to Aldonza Lorenzo (she refers to Don
Quixote as ‘Martín Quijada, el mentecapto’ [Martín Quijada, the
idiot]).62 Dulcinea ends up being substituted, in Avellaneda’s work, by
Bárbara, a grotesque semi-retired prostitute and witch whom Don
Quixote saves in a forest where she has been left tied to a tree by a
malicious student lover.63 Here, too, Avellaneda has opted for a very
different route from Cervantes’s, eliminating all the rich complexity
that marks Don Quixote’s relationship with his beloved.
Outraged by what he has overheard, Don Quixote loudly denounces
it as a lie. The two gentlemen come over to his room, where they
proceed to engage in a conversation about the Segundo tomo. There is
an immediate stress on the authenticity of the two figures who have
appeared; Don Quixote, as noted by Don Jerónimo, is clearly the ‘real
thing’: ‘“Ni vuestra presencia puede desmentir vuestro nombre, ni
vuestro nombre puede no acreditar vuestra presencia: sin duda, vos,
señor, sois el verdadero don Quijote de la Mancha, norte y lucero de la
andante caballería, a despecho y pesar del que ha querido usurpar
vuestro nombre y aniquilar vuestras hazañas, como ha hecho el autor
deste libro que aquí os entrego”’. [‘Neither can your presence belie
your name, nor can your name fail to accredit your presence: there can
be doubt that you, sir, are the real Don Quixote de la Mancha, guide
and lodestar of knight-errantry, in spite and in defiance of the one who
has attempted to usurp your name and obliterate your deeds, as has the
author of this book I have here’].64 Don Quixote begins to thumb
through the Segundo tomo, and proceeds to make three critical remarks:
first, regarding things said in the Prologue (an allusion to the venomous
attack on Cervantes); second, the language is ‘Aragonese’ (because of
the absence of articles where they should be used); the third, the error
in naming Sancho’s wife (Mari Gutiérrez as opposed to Teresa Panza).65
This ‘untruth’ brings Sancho into the conversation,66 which then
allows his own authenticity to be confirmed by Don Jerónimo: ‘“Por lo
que os he oído hablar, amigo…sin duda debéis de ser Sancho Panza, el
escudero del señor don Quijote.”’ [‘From what I have heard, my
friend…you must be Sancho Panza, Don Quixote’s squire’].67 This
becomes the tonic note for many of the other moments in which the
Segundo tomo is openly mentioned in the rest of Part II; Cervantes’s two
characters are the real ones as they match the models established in
Part I. Cervantes quickly points out the divergent representation of
Sancho by Avellaneda by having Don Jerónimo highlight the simplistic
gluttony of his apocryphal rival as well as the fact that the latter is not
particularly funny.68
Immediately after pointing out the misguided portrayal of Sancho,
the two gentlemen focus their attention on Don Quixote’s fundamental
reversibility: ‘Sumo fue el contento que los dos caballeros recibieron de
oír contar a don Quijote los estraños sucesos de su historia, y así
quedaron admirados de sus disparates como del elegante modo con que
los contaba. Aquí le tenían por discreto y allí se les deslizaba por
mentecato sin saber determinarse qué grado le darían entre la
discreción y la locura’ [It gave the two gentlemen great pleasure to
hear Don Quixote narrating the strange events of his own history, and
they were as astonished by his mad antics as by the elegant manner in
which he described them. One minute they thought him an intelligent
man, the next minute he skidded off into absurdity and they couldn’t
decide where to place him between sound sense and madness].69
Avellaneda has again completely missed the point regarding the
essential nature of the work’s protagonist. The two guests try to
convince Don Quixote to read more of the Segundo tomo, but he refuses
to do so—not only because he refuses to read something so
ostentatiously stupid, but because he does not want to have Avellaneda
derive satisfaction if he hears that he, the real Don Quixote, has read
his work.70
As the conversation draws to a close, the two gentlemen ask where
Don Quixote is headed. On hearing that he is going to participate in the
tourney in Zaragoza, they alert him that the Segundo tomo includes an
episode involving a poorly narrated ‘sortija’ [riding at the ring] in that
city.71 Here we encounter one of those moments that show just how
large the impact of the Segundo tomo is regarding the ultimate
configuration of Cervantes’s Part II. Wanting to distinguish himself
from anything that appears in the rival text, Don Quixote says that he
will not step foot in Zaragoza: ‘“Por el mismo caso…no pondré los pies
en Zaragoza y así sacaré a la plaza del mundo la mentira dese
historiador moderno, y echarán de ver las gentes como yo no soy el don
Quijote que él dice.”’ [‘Well, for that very reason…I shall not set foot in
Saragossa, and thus I shall announce that novice historian’s lie to the
whole world, and people will be made aware that I am not the Don
Quixote about whom he writes’].72
Who knows what Cervantes had in mind for the Zaragoza
adventures? How would Cervantes have developed Don Quixote’s first
urban experience? And where would Don Quixote and Sancho have
gone afterwards? As the reader knows, our hero chooses Barcelona as
his destination. This option was never mentioned as part of his original
itinerary. Would he ever have undergone any adventures at all in that
city? There is no textual evidence to that effect.
If Don Quixote had not set off to Barcelona, we never would have
had the encounter with Roque Guinart,73 with all the complex political
resonances that suffuse the friendship that develops. We would have
never had the maritime episodes,74 including the encounter with Ana
Félix and the subsequent ‘happy ending’ for this morisco girl, who is
taken under the wing of the Viceroy (who thus goes against official
state policy).75 More importantly, we would never have had, in its
precise form, the determining moment of the novel: to wit, the battle
between Don Quixote and the Caballero de la Blanca Luna [the Knight
of the White Moon] on the shores of the Mediterranean.
Before exploring further the role of Sansón Carrasco in the way the
work ends and its direct link with the Segundo tomo, let us canvas
quickly the other moments in which the apocryphal work is mentioned
openly. It is in Barcelona where Don Quixote has a second direct
encounter with the rival text. As our protagonist is accompanied
through the streets of Barcelona by Don Antonio, he runs across the
first printing shop he has ever seen. As it turns out, one of the books
being printed is the Segundo tomo, which leads our protagonist to
comment: ‘“Ya yo tengo noticia deste libro…y en verdad y en mi
conciencia que pensé que ya estaba quemado y hecho polvos por
impertinente; pero su San Martín se le llegará, como a cada puerco, que
las historias fingidas tanto tienen de buenas y de deleitables cuanto se
llegan a la verdad o la semejanza della, y las verdaderas tanto son
mejores cuanto son más verdaderas.”’ [‘Yes, I have heard about that
book…and I really and truly did believe that it had been burned to
ashes for its insolence, but it will have its Martinmas, like all hogs;
because fictional histories are good and entertaining in so far as they
approach the truth or what looks like it, and true histories are the
better the truer they are’].76 Besides the menacing insult levelled at it,77
we return, once again, to the complex problem of the nature of truth in
fiction. For Don Quixote, the work in which he appears is
historiographical in nature. Because the Segundo tomo has not narrated
what his actual actions have been, it is ‘false’, even though Don Quixote
himself is a character in a work of fiction.
In that sense, it is the other criterion—the importance of
verisimilitude—that applies. Can it be said that the Segundo tomo is less
verisimilar than Cervantes’s work? Probably not. When he says fiction
should be ‘near to truth’, is it something more transcendent than
resemblance to external reality? Is there an inherent ‘truth’ that can be
achieved in fiction through essentially aesthetic factors? Here again,
Cervantes would seem to be denouncing the Segundo tomo for not
having embodied the true inner workings of his protagonists and the
resulting dynamics of the episodes in which they participate.
The next mention of the Segundo tomo occurs in the episode in which
Sancho is called upon to ‘resurrect’ Altisidora when the two are
captured by the Duke’s men as they head back to their village.78 Among
the things Altisidora recounts regarding her trip to the underworld is a
scene in which she saw a group of devils playing a ball game in which,
instead of inflated spheres, books ‘“llenos de viento y borra”’ [‘full of
wind and stuffing’] were struck with rackets of fire. Altisidora
overheard a conversation between two devils who had just ‘gutted’ a
book with their blows.79 One of them asks its title:
Y el diablo le respondió: ‘Ésta es la Segunda parte de la historia de don
Quijote de la Mancha, no compuesta por Cide Hamete, su primer autor,
sino por un aragonés, que él dice ser natural de Tordesillas’.
‘Quitádmele de ahí—respondió el otro diablo—y metedle en los abismos
del infierno, no le vean mis ojos’. ‘Tan malo—replicó el primero—, que
si de propósito yo mismo me pusiera a hacerle peor, no acertara’.
[And the other devil replied: ‘It’s the second part of the history of Don
Quixote de la Mancha, not written by Cide Hamete, its first author, but
by some Aragonese person who says he comes from Tordesillas.’
‘Remove it,’ replied the other devil, ‘and consign it to the depths of hell,
I never want to so see it again.’ ‘Is it as bad as all that?’ the other one
asked. ‘It’s so bad,’ replied the first devil, ‘that if I’d tried my very
hardest to write a worse one the task would have been beyond me.’]80
Here, quite literally, the Segundo tomo has met the fate promised it by
Don Quixote (slaughtered like a pig). From this ferociously direct
assault Don Quixote returns to the more subtle complexities of the
nature of truth in fiction:
Yo no me he alterado en oír que ando como cuerpo fantástico por las
tinieblas del abismo, ni por la claridad de la tierra, porque no soy aquel
de quien esa historia trata. Si ella fuere buena, fiel y verdadera, tendrá
siglos de vida; pero si fuere mala, de su parto a la sepultura no será
muy largo el camino.
[It has not disturbed me to learn that I wander in a fantastic shape
through the shades of hell or the clear light of earth, because I am not
the person described in that history. If any history is good, faithful and
true, it will enjoy centuries of life, but if it is bad the road from its birth
to its burial will not be a long one.]81
Don Quixote is not bothered by this report from Hell because he is not
the ‘same one’ that appears in the Segundo tomo.
The most transcendentally complex exploration of why Cervantes’s
Don Quixote must be recognized as the ‘real one’ is found in the famous
scene in Chapter 72 in which our protagonist encounters Don Álvaro
Tarfe in an inn just before arriving back at his village. Don Quixote
hears a servant refer to his master as ‘señor don Álvaro Tarfe’ and
immediately asks him if he is the same one who appears in the Segundo
tomo. Don Álvaro confirms that he is, indeed, the individual in
question. Our Don Quixote then asks him whether he looks like the one
Don Álvaro knew; the latter responds that he bears no resemblance
whatsoever. When asked whether he also knew Sancho Panza, Don
Álvaro confirms that he did, adding that although the squire had a
reputation for being verbally funny (‘gracioso’), he never heard
anything to bear that out. This provokes Sancho into an attack on the
impostor as he eloquently defends his own vis comica. Just hearing
Sancho speak is enough to convince Don Álvaro that he has before him
the true Don Quixote and Sancho—in no way resembling the pair with
whom he had interacted in the Segundo tomo.
On hearing this, Don Quixote asks Don Álvaro to swear before the
village’s mayor that he has never seen them before this moment, and
that they are not the ones portrayed in the Segundo tomo. Don Álvaro
agrees to do so immediately, and even offers to assert that he never saw
what he saw nor did he ever experience what he experienced.
Here is the nub of this amazing moment in literary history, one
which puts in the foreground the whole problem of the ontological
status of a fictional character. Don Álvaro, a character from an
apocryphal ‘false’ continuation appears in the ‘real’ continuation and
engages in dialogue with the ‘real characters’. If the work from which
he proceeds is fake, what is he doing here in the inn, interacting with
the ‘true’ protagonists? How can he swear that he has not experienced
what he has experienced? Does not the fact that he comes from a ‘fake’
work have a spill-over effect on the two characters with whom he is
talking? Or could it even have the reverse effect—that is, conferring
‘reality’ on the supposedly apocryphal work?
And then, of course, the bigger question: why is one pair of these
two characters any more ‘real’ than the other? If both works are
fictional, how can it be argued that Cervantes’s two characters are
somehow more ‘genuine’ than the other two? Do characters ‘belong’
somehow to their author, deriving from that entity a ‘substance’ which
definitively grounds them? The whole question opens up the can of
worms inherent in the notion of ‘intellectual property’. Does the fact
that Cervantes had a copyright on his novel mean that any appearance
by his characters in another author’s novel automatically renders them
‘fake’? Cervantes’s Don Quixote and Sancho are just as much the
product of the literary imagination and typography as Avellaneda’s.
How can it be claimed that they are more ‘real’? Needless to say, all of
this prefigures many of the problems addressed in contemporary
fiction, from Borges and Unamuno to the postmodernists.
The labyrinthine, almost absurdist, nature of this entire moment
reaches its climax when the three characters appear before the mayor
and a notary, and Don Álvaro proceeds to swear that he had never met
Don Quixote and Sancho prior to this moment and that they are
definitely not the two who appear in the Segundo tomo. Cide Hamete
highlights how happy our ‘real’ protagonists are when the legal
procedure is concluded, adding the following comment: ‘como si les
importara mucho semejante declaración y no mostrara claro la
diferencia de los dos don Quijotes y la de los dos Sanchos sus obras y
sus palabras’ [as if their deeds and their words didn’t clearly shows
how the difference between the two Don Quixotes and between the two
Sanchos].82 Nonetheless, our two ‘real’ heroes head out of the inn with
their ‘certificate of authenticity’ and soon arrive back at their village. It
is here that Cervantes launches his final assault on Avellaneda. As Don
Quixote lies dying, he dictates his last will and testament, one of whose
clauses addresses the apocryphal continuation in direct fashion:
Iten, suplico a los dichos señores mis albaceas que si la buena suerte les
trujere a conocer al autor que dicen que compuso una historia que anda
por ahí con el título de Segunda parte de las hazañas de don Quijote de
la Mancha, de mi parte le pida, cuan encarecidamente ser pueda,
perdone la ocasión que sin yo pensarlo le di de haber escrito tantos y
tan grandes disparates como en ella escribe, porque parto desta vida
con escrúpulo de haberle dado motivo para escribirlos.
[Likewise I request the aforementioned gentleman, my executors, if
they are fortunate enough to meet the author who is said to have
written a history that is circulating under the title of The Second Part of
the Exploits of Don Quixote de la Mancha, to beg him on my behalf, as
earnestly as they can, to forgive me for unintentionally having provided
him with the opportunity to write all the gross absurdities contained in
that book; because I am leaving this life with scruples of conscience for
having given him an excuse for writing them.]83
Here, too, Cervantes takes brutal countermeasures against his rival,
corrosively downgrading the quality of the latter’s work.
Once Don Quixote has passed away, another set of counter steps is
implemented. The Segundo tomo leaves our protagonist alive, with the
prospect of another series of adventures, albeit without Sancho as his
squire.84 Such a prospect horrifies Cervantes, who is in failing health,
and thus might not be able to respond to any further misappropriations
of his work. The ‘final solution’ Cervantes implements is, first, to have
Don Quixote die, and second, to have it legally confirmed:
Viendo lo cual [Don Quixote’s death], pidió [the priest] al escribano le
diese por testimonio como Alonso Quijano el Bueno, llamado
comúnmente ‘Don Quijote de la Mancha’, había pasado deste presente
vida y muerto naturalmente; y que el tal testimonio pedía para quitar la
ocasión de que algún otro autor que Cide Hamete Benengeli le
resucitase falsamente y hiciese inacabables historias de sus hazañas.
[At which the priest asked the notary to write out a certificate to the
effect that Alonso Quixano the Good, commonly known as Don Quixote
de la Mancha, had passed on from this life, and died from natural
causes. And he said that he was requesting this certificate to deprive
any author other than Cide Hamete Benengeli of the opportunity to
bring him falsely back to life and write endless histories of his
exploits.]85
Don Quixote cannot rise from his grave; any future adventures narrated
would be patently false.
To round things off, however, Cervantes has yet another trick up his
sleeve. When addressing his quill pen, Cide Hamete says:
Aquí quedarás colgada desta espetera y deste hilo de alambre, ni sé
si bien cortada o mal tajada péñola mía, adonde vivirás luengos
siglos, si presuntuosos y malandrines historiadores no te descuelgan
para profanarte. Pero antes que a ti lleguen, les puedes advertir y
decirles en el mejor modo que pudieres:
‘¡Tate, tate, folloncicos!
De ninguno sea tocada,
porque esta empresa, buen rey,
para mí estaba guardada.
‘Para mí sola nació don Quijote, y yo para él: él supo obrar y yo
escribir, solos los dos somos para en uno, a despecho y pesar del
escritor fingido y tordesillesco que se atrevió o se ha de atrever a
escribir con pluma de avestruz grosera y mal deliñada las hazañas de
mi valeroso caballero, porque no es carga de sus hombros, ni asunto
de su resfriado ingenio; a quien advertirás, si acaso llegas a
conocerle, que deje reposar en la sepultura los cansados y ya
podridos huesos de don Quijote, y no le quiera llevar, contra todos
los fueros de la muerte, a Castilla la Vieja, haciéndole salir de la
fuesa donde real y verdaderamente yace tendido de largo a largo,
imposibilitado de hacer tercera jornada y salida nueva.’
[Here you shall rest, hanging from this rack on this length of brass
wire, O quill of mine—whether well-trimmed or not I do not know—
and here you shall live on for many centuries, unless presumptuous
and knavish historians take you down to profane you. But before
they touch you, you can warn them and tell them as best you can:
‘Hands off, hands off, you paltry knaves;
My noble king, let none
Attempt this enterprise:
It’s kept for me alone’
For me alone was Don Quixote born, and I for him; it was for him to
act, for me to write; we two are as one, in spite of that false writer
from Tordesillas who has had and may even again have the
effrontery to write a coarse and clumsy ostrich quill about my
valiant knight’s deeds, because this is not a burden for his shoulders
or a subject for his torpid wit. And you can warn him, if you happen
to meet him, to leave Don Quixote’s weary mouldering bones at rest
in his tomb, and not to try to take him, in the face of all the
prerogatives of death, to Old Castile, making him rise from the grave
where he really and truly does lie stretched out at full length, quite
incapable of any third sally or fresh campaign.]86
The fact that Cervantes adds this passage shows just how obsessed he is
with his rival. Don Quixote is Cide Hamete/Cervantes’s ‘intellectual
property’.87 If anyone else tries to use his pen to write more, the pen
must scare him off. That he is thinking primarily of Avellaneda is made
evident when he refers to the ‘escritor fingido y tordesillesco’.
And here we must reflect on what may have been the greatest
impact of Avellaneda’s work on Cervantes’s original plan. Is there
anything in the general design or logic of the work that requires Don
Quixote to die? Is his passing away something Cervantes had
meticulously planned from its very inception?
Many Cervantes scholars would answer in the affirmative. As I have
argued in De fiestas…and more recently in ‘“El espantajo…’, there is
really nothing in the text that confirms this notion. The work is built on
the carnivalesque matrix of successive festive deaths and resurrections.
Don Quixote always bounces back, no matter how harsh the dethroning
he suffers. Let us remember that he is only fifty.88 Virtually every genre
of prose fiction of the time—chivalresque, pastoral, picaresque—allows
for, and even encourages, continuations. Why cannot Don Quixote and
Sancho go back on the road? Why cannot the pastoral project that had
enthused him so much be the raw material for a sequel?89 But if such a
door were to be left open, there waits Avellaneda beyond it.
It is worth speculating on what the very rich historical reception of
the work would have looked like with a Don Quixote still alive at the
end of Cervantes’s Part II. While the admonitory tale might have been
left intact (Don Quixote recovers his sanity and denounces his absurd
behaviour), the Romantic reading might never have appeared at all. A
repentant Don Quixote has one kind of resonance; a Don Quixote who
both repents and dies has another. His perishing is what opens the
possibility of his becoming a tragic character, one whose battle against
‘the Real’, against ‘Society’, or ‘the System’, brings about his definitive
defeat. Presenting him as a Christ figure would have been much more
difficult to bring off. All the tear-jerking film versions such as Man of La
Mancha might never have been created.90
If I am right on this point, Cervantes’s debt to Avellaneda is greater
than he ever could have imagined. The sabotage ended up producing
the reverse effect, laying the basis for the Quixote to become the
‘greatest novel ever written’. Remember that the major works of the
canon are, almost by definition, tragic, or at least profoundly sad.
Comic works have always been consigned to the lower echelons of the
literary pantheon (starting with Aristotle).91
As Gómez Canseco has pointed out, the Segundo tomo also supplied
Cervantes with the opportunity to put on display all of the ‘avant-
garde’, proto-Borgesian pyrotechnics, which establishes him, as Robert
Alter has pointed out, as the founder of both major strains within the
history of the modern novel (the other being that which leans toward
realism).92
To wrap up this brief review of the Cervantes/Avellaneda interplay,
let us return to our point of departure. It is difficult indeed to resist the
temptation to speculate on the identity of the anonymous author who
directly affected the history of the modern novel. I have argued that it
is much more important to bring to light the ideological/aesthetic
infrastructure that sustains the Segundo tomo rather than coming up
with a precise name. Regardless of who the ‘biological father’ might
have been, we have his text, and to think that we will somehow acquire
a hermeneutical key if we know his actual identity would be a serious
misstep. Even if Avellaneda did turn out to be a clergyman, for
example, that does not mean that the text perforce embodies Counter-
Reformation ideology.
Along with others,93 I have argued that the Segundo tomo is strongly
marked by reactionary, primarily aristocratic, values in such a way that
we are led to think that Avellaneda is either a well-connected member
of the cultural Establishment, or is someone who wants to be one. It is
easy to imagine him as a younger writer, currying favour with the
powers that be. The strong possibility that he was a member of Lope’s
circle in no way precludes this reading: the ‘Phoenix’ himself was a
notorious social climber, and was, in turn, surrounded by others like
him. While settling accounts for Lope, Avellaneda could also
simultaneously be racking up points vis-à-vis the social class with
which he is trying to ingratiate himself.
In De fiestas…I have argued that Avellaneda is a younger writer in
part because of his treatment of several major thematic areas that have
ties to sociocultural and historical trends occurring at the time. His
perspective on madness as well as popular-festive culture and related
areas concerning the human body place him a full generation after
Cervantes.94 Many of the writers who conform to the proposed
ideological profile of Avellaneda, as well as his lining up with the
cultural sensibility just mentioned, were born around the year 1580
(Castillo Solórzano, Tirso, Quevedo, Salas Barbadillo, Ruiz de Alarcón,
Medinilla). Avellaneda fits perfectly well within that cluster of writers
that Close associates with the campaign to ‘tone down’ the
‘Aristophanic’ excesses of earlier Spanish humour.95
In sum, the ‘whodunit’ that has stretched over the last four centuries
is likely to continue for much longer to the continuing secret
satisfaction of many cervantistas. For the lay reader of the Quixote,
however, it is ultimately a non-issue. What is significant are the
components of Cervantes’s Part II, which are responses, both overt and
indirect, to the Segundo tomo. Unbeknownst to him, those tears that
might start to well up when Don Quixote dies at the end of the ‘greatest
novel ever written’ are the fruit of Avellaneda’s apocryphal
continuation.
While it may be too much to ask that lay reader also to take a look
at Avellaneda’s Segundo tomo, anyone who teaches or writes about Don
Quixote is being seriously negligent if she does not do so. Reading it
need not be akin to taking a spoonful of cod liver oil: the Segundo tomo
is far from being as bad as it has been painted by the Cervantes
Establishment going back centuries. As Gómez Canseco96 and others
have noted, it actually has considerable literary merits—especially, of
course, if we compare it not to Cervantes’s Don Quixote but to other
prose fiction of the period.97 Indeed, they were deemed sufficient
enough to earn it a healthy number of translations over the centuries: a
total of thirty-three.98 While obviously drawn into the limelight
because of the importance of Cervantes’s masterpiece, if it lacked any
kind of artistic merit (as has been repeated for generations), translators
and their publishers would not have thrown away their time, effort,
and resources on bringing it into print.
Works Cited
Alter, Robert. Partial Magic: The Novel as a Self-Conscious Genre (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1975).
Avalle-Arce, Juan Bautista. Don Quijote como forma de vida (Madrid: Fundación
Juan March, 1976).
Bakhtin, Mikhail. Rabelais and His World, translated by Krystyna Pomorska
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1968).
Braudel, Fernand. The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of
Philip II, 2 vols. (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995).
Cervantes, Miguel de. El ingenioso hidalgo don Quijote de la Mancha, edited by
Francisco Rico, et al. (Madrid: Real Academia Española, 2015).
Cervantes, Miguel de. The Ingenious Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha,
translated by John Rutherford (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 2000).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Novelas ejemplares, vol. I, edited by Harry Sieber (Madrid:
Cátedra, 1982).
Close, Anthony. Cervantes and the Comic Mind of His Age (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2000).
Close, Anthony. The Romantic Approach to Don Quixote: A Critical History of the
Romantic Tradition in Quixote Criticism (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1978).
Cherchi, Paolo. Capitoli di critica cervantina (Roma: Bulzoni, 1977).
Fernández de Avellaneda, Alonso. Don Quixote de la Mancha (Part II): Being the
Spurious Continuation of Miguel de Cervantes’s Part I, translated by Alberta W.
Server and John E. Keller (Newark, DE: Juan de la Cuesta, 1980).
Fernández de Avellaneda, Alonso. Segundo tomo del ingenioso hidalgo don Quijote
de la Mancha, edited by Luis Gómez Canseco (Madrid: Real Academia
Española, 2014).
Foucault, Michel. Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Age of
Reason, translated by Richard Howard (London: Routledge, 2001).
Gilman, Stephen. Cervantes y Avellaneda: estudio de una imitación (Mexico: El
Colegio de México, 1951).
Gómez Canseco, Luis. Introducción and Anejos. In Segundo tomo del ingenioso
hidalgo don Quijote de la Mancha by Alonso Fernández de Avellaneda, pp. 7*–
123*, pp. 519–90.
González Duro, Enrique. Historia de la locura en España, 2 vols. (Madrid: Temas
de Hoy, 1994–5).
Hill, Christopher. The World Turned Upside Down: Radical Ideas during the English
Revolution (New York: Penguin, 1975).
Iffland, James. De fiestas y aguafiestas: risa, locura e ideología en Cervantes y
Avellaneda 
(Madrid/Pamplona/Frankfurt: 
Editorial 
Iberoamericana,
Universidad de Navarra, Vervuert, 1999).
Iffland, James. ‘“El espantajo y el coco del mundo”: la risible muerte de don
Quijote’. 
In 
El 
‘Quijote’ 
de 
1615: 
dobleces, 
inversiones, 
paradojas,
desbordamientos e imposibles, edited by Antonio Cortijo, Gustavo Illades, y
Francisco Ramírez (Santa Barbara: Publications of eHumanista [University of
California], 2016), pp. 132–44.
Iffland, James. ‘Ladrones de tinta: The Avellaneda Mystery as “Whodunit”‘. In
Studies in Spanish Literature in Honor of Daniel Eisenberg, edited by Tom
Lathrop (Newark, Delaware: Juan de la Cuesta-Hispanic Monographs, 2009),
pp. 121–51.
Iffland, James. ‘Laughter Tamed’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of
America 23, no. 2 (2003): pp. 395–435. (Review-article of Anthony Close’s
Cervantes and the Comic Mind of His Age).
Iffland, James. ‘Seeing is Believing: The Rhetoric of Graphic Illustration in the
History of Don Quijote’. Cervantes: The Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of
America 27, no. 1 (2007 [2008]): pp. 95–160.
López Estrada, Francisco. ‘Fiestas y literatura en los Siglos de Oro: la Edad
Media como asunto “festivo” (el caso del Quijote)’. Bulletin Hispanique 84, no.
3 (1982): pp. 297–327.
Maravall, José Antonio. La cultura del barroco: análisis de una estructura histórica
(Barcelona: Ariel, 1975).
Martín Morán, José Manuel. ‘Cervantes y Avellaneda: apuntes para una
relectura del Quijote’. In Actas del XI Congreso de la Asociación Internacional de
Hispanistas, vol. V, edited by Juan Villegas (Irvine, CA: University of
California Press, 1994), pp. 137–47.
Martín Morán, José Manuel. El ‘Quijote’ en ciernes: los descuidos de Cervantes y las
fases de elaboración textual (Torino: Edizioni dell’Orso, 1990).
Molho, Maurice. Cervantes: raíces folklóricas (Madrid: Gredos, 1976).
Redondo, Augustin. Otra manera de leer el Quijote (Madrid: Castalia, 1998).
Redondo, Augustin. ‘Tradición carnavalesca y creación literaria: del personaje
de Sancho Panza al episodio de la ínsula Barataria en el Quijote’. Bulletin
Hispanique 80, no. 1 (1978): pp. 39–70.
Riquer, Martín de. Introducción. Segundo tomo del ingenioso hidalgo don Quixote
de la Mancha by Alonso Fernández de Avellaneda, vol. I, edited by Riquer
(Madrid: Espasa-Calpe, 1972).
Russell, Peter. ‘Don Quixote as a Funny Book’. Modern Language Review 64
(1969): pp. 312–26.
Sicroff, Albert. ‘La segunda muerte de don Quijote como respuesta de Cervantes
a Avellaneda’. Nueva Revista de Filología Hispánica 24 (1975): pp. 267–91.
Vassberg, David. Land and Society in Golden Age Castile (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1984).
Vilanova, Antonio. Erasmo y Cervantes (Barcelona: Lumen, 1989).
Zijderveldt, Anton. Reality in a Looking-glass: Rationality through an Analysis of
Traditional Folly (London/Boston: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1982).
Ziolkowski, Eric. The Sanctification of Don Quixote: From Hidalgo to Priest
(University Park, PA: Penn State University Press, 1991).
1 For a review of the relevant scholarship, see Gómez Canseco’s Introduction
to his edition of the Segundo tomo (pp. 15*–25*). Asterisks are used in this
edition to differentiate the pagination of the Introduction from that of the main
text. For the analysis of a contemporary ‘whodunit’ actually based on the
Avellaneda case, see Iffland, ‘Ladrones de tinta…’.
2 For example, see Avalle-Arce, pp. 41 and 44.
3 p. 56.
4 An exception to this generalization is the defacement, at the hands of a
Spanish inquisitor, of a portrait of Erasmus in a copy of Sebastian Münster’s
Cosmographia. Another reader wrote in the margin next to it: ‘y su amigo don
Quijote’ [and his friend Don Quixote] and ‘Sancho Panza’, thereby showing an
awareness of an Erasmian presence in Cervantes’s work (see Gómez Canseco, p.
45*).
5 For my critique of Gilman’s work, see De fiestas…, pp. 15–27.
6 This point is emphasized by Riquer in his Introduction to the Segundo tomo
(v. I, p. xliii).
7 Antonio Vilanova has made the most important contribution toward
establishing a connection between the great Dutch humanist and our author,
including the possible influence of Praise of Folly on the representation of Don
Quixote’s mental malady.
8 For an analysis of the respective modalities of reversibility, see Iffland, De
fiestas…, pp. 133–41 and pp. 143–59.
9 On this subject, see Vassberg.
10 I allude here to Russell’s article, in which he asserts the centrality of the
work’s comic dimension (going against the tide of the Romantic approach).
11 See Iffland, De fiestas…
12 For an analysis of this topic, see De fiestas…, especially Part I, Chapter 1
(‘Contornos e ideología de la risa cervantina’) and Part II, Chapter 1 (‘Risa y
represión’).
13 Iffland, De fiestas…, pp. 59–62.
14 For an exploration of the politics of carnivalesque practices, with
references to relevant bibliography, see Iffland, De fiestas…, pp. 167–78.
15 Hill’s study of the political and social upheaval in seventeenth century
England sheds significant light on the dynamics in question. See Iffland, De
fiestas…, for the application of Hill’s analysis to the Quixote.
16 For an analysis of this dynamic, see Bakhtin. A confirmation of the direct
connection between the Quixote and Carnival culture is the rapidity with which
its two protagonists were assimilated into popular-festive practices in Spain and
elsewhere. For a thorough survey of this phenomenon, see López Estrada in
which the author suggests that people ‘recognized’ the book’s two main
characters as if they had a previous existence within their festive practices (pp.
317–18).
17 Regarding the ‘complex nature of carnival laughter’, Bakhtin says the
following: ‘It is, first of all, a festive laughter. Therefore it is not an individual
reaction to some isolated “comic” event. Carnival laughter is the laughter of all
the people. Second, it is a universal in scope; it is directed at all and everyone,
including the carnival’s participants. The entire world is seen in its droll aspect,
in its gay relativity. Third, this laughter is ambivalent: it is gay, triumphant, and
at the same time mocking, deriding. It asserts and denies, it buries and revives’
(pp. 11–12).
18 Bakhtin, pp. 90–4.
19 For Bakhtin’s formulation of this phenomenon, see pp. 18–28. It should be
noted that he uses the interaction between Don Quixote and Sancho to
exemplify part of his argument.
20 Bakhtin, p. 66.
21 See Iffland, De fiestas…, pp. 37–58.
22 Iffland, De fiestas…, pp. 38–9.
23 See the chapter entitled ‘Risa y represión’ in De fiestas…, pp. 233–65.
24 For an excellent survey of this phenomenon, see Zijderveldt.
25 For the classic study of this phenomenon, see Foucault. For a solid survey
of the case of Spain, specifically, see González Duro.
26 For my analysis of this phenomenon, see ‘La panza como espectáculo’ in
De fiestas…, pp. 305–27.
27 See the chapter entitled ‘Bufonería y arribismo cortesano’ in De fiestas…,
pp. 329–46. Had Don Quixote not been so out of control in his lunacy, he, too,
would have suffered a similar fate, according to Avellaneda.
28 After leaving his hometown of Argamesilla de Alba (no longer simply a
‘lugar de la Mancha’), Don Quixote and Sancho travel to Ateca, Zaragoza,
Sigüenza, Alcalá, Madrid, and Toledo.
29 In the Prologue to Part I, Cervantes’s ‘amigo…gracioso y bien entendido’
(I. Prologue, p. 11) [‘friend of mine…a lively and clever man’, p. 12]
recommends the following: ‘“Procurad también que, leyendo vuestra historia, el
melancólico se mueva a risa, el risueño la acreciente”’ (I, Prólogo, p. 19) [‘“You
should also try to ensure that the melancholy man is moved to laughter when
he reads your history, the jovial man laughs even more”’ (p. 16)].
30 p. 32*.
31 Fernández de Avellaneda, Segundo tomo, pp. 7–8.
32 Much of the derisive irony directed at the displays of pseudo-erudition on
the part of contemporary writers has Lope as its real target. See Part I, Prólogo,
p. 12, note 31; also, the Volumen complementario, p. 331, note 12.36.
33 Fernández de Avellaneda, Segundo tomo, pp. 7–8. For an explanation of the
term ‘sinónomos voluntarios’, see Gómez Canseco, p. 455, note 8.8. It seems to
refer to tendentious wordplay.
34 See Gómez Canseco, pp. 18* and 20*.
35 See pp. 27*–32*.
36 See pp. 55*–7*.
37 This is the view presented by Braudel.
38 In the Prologue of Part II he says: ‘Lo que no he podido dejar de sentir es
que me note de viejo y de manco, como si hubiera sido en mi mano haber
detenido el tiempo, que no pasase por mí, o si me manquedad hubiera nacido
en alguna taberna, sino en la más alta ocasión que vieron los siglos pasados, los
presentes, ni esperan ver los venideros. Si mis heridas no resplandecen en los
ojos de quien las mira, son estimadas a lo menos en la estimación de los que
saben dónde se cobraron…Las [heridas] que el soldado muestra en el rostro y
en los pechos, estrellas son que guían a los demás al cielo de la honra, y al de
desear la justa alabanza’ (II.Prologue, pp. 673–4). [‘What I couldn’t help
resenting is that he attacks me for being old and one-handed, as if it had been
in my power to halt time and prevent it from ravaging me, or as if I had been
maimed in some tavern brawl rather than at the greatest battle that past or
present ages would have ever seen or that future ages can ever hope to see. If
my wounds do not shine in the eyes of those who behold them, they are at least
honoured in the estimation of those who know where they were received…The
scars that the soldier displays on his face and his breast are stars that lead
others to the heaven of honour and hopes of merited praise’ (p. 483)]. See also
the Prologue to the Novelas ejemplares (p. 51).
39 Fernández de Avellaneda, Segundo tomo, p. 7.
40 ‘[U]na de las mayores [tentaciones] es ponerle a un hombre en el
entendimiento que puede componer y imprimir un libro con que gane tanta
fama como dineros y tantos dineros cuanta fama’ (II. Prólogo, p. 675). [‘[O]ne
of the greatest of them is to put it into a man’s head that he can write and print
a book that will earn him as much fame as money, and as much money as fame’
(p. 484)].
41 See II.Prologue, p. 675; p. 484.
42 II.Prologue, p. 676; p. 485.
43 II.Prologue, p. 676; p. 485.
44 This is the chapter in which Don Quixote overhears two gentlemen
commenting on the Segundo tomo in the room next to his at an inn (see below).
45 See Iffland, De fiestas…, p. 379.
46 Here I follow the calculation of Albert Sicroff, pp. 268–9.
47 See Gómez Canseco, pp. 520–34; De fiestas…(entire Tercera Parte).
48 See Riquer, p. xxxviii; Gómez Canseco p. 519.
49 De fiestas…, pp. 381–2.
50 An archetypal instance of this phenomenon is the following passage from
the aftermath of Don Quixote’s adventure with the lion: ‘En todo este tiempo no
había hablado don Diego de Miranda, todo atento a mirar y a notar los hechos y
palabras de don Quijote, pareciéndole que era un cuerdo loco y un loco que
tiraba a cuerdo. No había aún llegado a su noticia la primera parte de su
historia, que si la hubiera leído cesara la admiración en que lo ponían sus
hechos y sus palabras, pues ya supiera el género de su locura; pero como no la
sabía, ya le tenía por cuerdo y ya por loco, porque lo hablaba era concertado,
elegante y bien dicho, y lo que hacía, disparatado, temerario y tonto’ (II.17, p.
838). [‘All this time Don Diego de Miranda hadn’t spoken a word, so concerned
was he to observe what Don Quixote did and to listen to what he said, because
he regarded him as a sane man with madness in him, and as a madman with
sane tendencies. Don Diego didn’t know about the first part of Don Quixote’s
history—if he had read it he would have known what sort of madness he
suffered from, which would have prevented him being amazed by his words and
deeds; but not knowing about it, he sometimes thought him sane and sometimes
mad, because what he said was coherent, elegant and well expressed, and what
he did was absurd, foolhardy and stupid’ (pp. 597–8)]. This would seem to be a
direct rebuke of Avellaneda, highlighting that if he had really read Part I with
any degree of attention, he would not have traduced his protagonist so
profoundly.
51 See II.51, p. 1150; p. 838. Along similar lines, it is worth noting that in
II.5, one that the morisco translator suspects to be apocryphal (II.5, p. 723; p.
514), Sancho lays out very articulately the motivation for his being willing to
continue to follow Don Quixote on his adventures. Like so many of his
contemporaries, he is not content to remain in his station as a lowly day
labourer, wishing, instead, to accede to the aristocracy. This chapter, virtually
an autonomous set-piece, could easily have been produced once Cervantes had
read the Segundo tomo.
52 See Redondo, ‘Tradición carnavalesca…’ and Iffland, De fiestas…, pp. 452–
60.
53 II.32, p. 973; p. 696.
54 II.60, p. 1232; p. 902. II.61, pp.1233–4, p. 903.
55 Our hero even tries to recruit Guinart into the profession of knight
errantry (II.60, pp. 1229–30; p. 900).
56 II.63, pp. 1252–3; p. 917. Sancho even undergoes a more transcendent
version of the carnivalesque blanketing he suffered in the inn in I.17, with the
galley slaves passing him over their heads from one side of the ship to the other,
to his great terror.
57 II.59, pp. 1215–16; pp. 888–9.
58 See the description of the sumptuous banquet offered by the rich farmer
(II.20, pp. 864–5; pp. 617–18). As the narrator notes, it would have been
enough to feed a whole army (II.20, p. 865; p. 618).
59 II.59, p. 1213; p. 887.
60 II.59, p. 1213; p. 887.
61 Chapter 4, p. 47.
62 Chapter 2, p. 31. Avellaneda assigns our protagonist a given name from
the very beginning, and opts for ‘Quijada’ over the other surnames shuffled in
Cervantes’s Part I. Cervantes, of course, only informs us that Don Quixote’s
name was Alonso at the very end of Part II, a gesture that is probably also a
response to Avellaneda.
63 Chapter 22, p. 229; pp. 233–7; Chapter 23, pp. 240–2. Our protagonist
promptly dubs her the ‘reina Zenobia’ [Queen Zenobia].
64 II.52, p. 1214; pp. 887–8.
65 II.59, pp. 1214–15; p. 888.
66 Sancho had, indeed, referred to his wife as Mari Gutiérrez in I.7, p. 102,
something of which Cervantes had to be aware.
67 II.59, p. 1215; p. 888.
68 ‘“Pues a fe—dijo el caballero—que no os trata este autor moderno con la
limpieza que en vuestra persona se muestra: píntaos comedor y simple y nonada
gracioso, y muy otro del Sancho que en la primera parte de la historia de
vuestro amo se describe”’ [‘“Well the fact is”, the gentleman said, “that this
novice author doesn’t treat you with the scrupulosity that you display in your
person: he represents you as a glutton, and simple-minded, and not at all funny,
very different from the Sancho described in the first part of the history of your
master’”] (II.59, p. 1215; p. 888).
69 II.59, p. 1216; p. 889.
70 I.59, p. 1217; p. 890.
71 The sortija was an equestrian competition practiced by aristocrats,
consisting of racing at a suspended ring through which the rider strove to insert
his lance. Avellaneda’s novel includes an episode in which Don Quixote does,
indeed, participate (grotesquely) in such a competition.
72 II.59, pp. 1217–18; p. 890.
73 II.60–1.
74 II.63–5.
75 II.65, p. 1274; p. 934. It was strictly forbidden for moriscos to remain on
Spanish soil after the expulsion was announced in 1609.
76 II.62, p. 1251; p. 916.
77 Saint Martin’s day, 11 November, was when pigs were traditionally
slaughtered.
78 II.68–70.
79 ‘“A uno dellos, nuevo flamante y bien encuadernado, le dieron un
papirotazo, que le sacaron las tripas y le esparcieron las hojas”’ [‘“One of them,
brand-new and well bound, was given such a thump that its guts poured out
and its leaves flew all over the place”’ (II.70, p. 1306; p. 958).
80 II.70, p. 1306; p. 958.
81 II.70, p. 1306; p. 958.
82 II.72, p. 1321; p. 969.
83 II.74, p. 1334; p. 980.
84 In his brief preview of Don Quixote’s further adventures, Avellaneda
points out that the squire our protagonist takes along with him is actually a
pregnant young female servant disguised as a man, who gives birth to the great
surprise of the protagonist. He subsequently goes on his adventures alone
(Chapter 36, p. 394).
85 II.74, p. 1335; p. 980.
86 II.74, pp. 1336–7; p. 981. The mention of Castilla la Vieja (Old Castille)
comes about because that is where Don Quixote is alleged to have gone after
leaving the Casa del Nuncio (Chapter 36, p. 394).
87 In the work’s closing lines Cide Hamete clarifies that he and Cervantes are
one and the same: ‘“no ha sido otro mi deseo que poner en aborrecimiento de
los hombres las fingidas y disparatadas historias de los libros de caballerías, que
por las de mi verdadero Don Quijote van ya tropezando y han de caer del todo
sin duda alguna.”’ [‘my only desire has been to make men hate those false,
absurd histories in books of chivalry, which thanks to the exploits of my real
Don Quixote are even now tottering, and without any doubt will soon tumble to
the ground’] (II.74, p. 1337; p. 982). At no prior point has Cide Hamete made
this claim regarding his principal objective; Cervantes (or ‘Cervantes’), on the
other hand, has made it, very clearly, in the Prologue to Part I.
88 It is worth noting that in the illustrations of the work done in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, Don Quixote is portrayed as much
younger than in those that start to emerge with the Romantic reading of the
work. As part of the casting of Don Quixote as essentially a tragic figure,
illustrators such as Gustav Doré began to present him as much older than he
actually is. For more on this subject, see Iffland, ‘Seeing is Believing…’.
89 See II.67, pp. 1283–7; pp. 940–3, where Don Quixote suggests that Sancho
and he become shepherds during the year he promised to stay in his village,
and even throws out the idea of recruiting Sansón Carrasco and the priest Pero
Pérez. These two show considerable support for the project when Don Quixote
brings it up in the work’s penultimate chapter (II.73, pp. 1325–7; p. 973–4).
90 For these variants of the Romantic reading of the work, see Close, The
Romantic…; for a detailed study of Don Quixote as a Christ-figure, see
Ziolkowski. See Chapter 29 of this volume for a study of Cervantes on film.
91 See Bakhtin on the fate suffered, for example, by Rabelais (among others).
92 Gómez Canseco, pp. 530–4; Alter, pp. 3–4. As a coda to this crucial issue, I
would point out that when Cervantes decides to ‘kill off’ Don Quixote, he does
so in a way that still respects the basic carnivalesque undergirding of the work.
In two separate works, I have striven to show how the staging of Don Quixote’s
death is done in a way fully in accord with the dynamics that have suffused the
work up to its last pages (De fiestas…, pp. 563–8; ‘“El espantajo…”’). Our
protagonist perishes in a way that links it to the ‘laughable death’ that marks all
Carnival monarchs. Among the elements that support this interpretation is
Sansón Carrasco’s irreverent epitaph for Don Quixote’s tomb that characterizes
our hero as a ‘scarecrow’ (‘espantajo’) and ‘bogeyman’ (‘coco’) (II.74, p. 1336).
These terms go completely against the grain of the Romantic reading of the
work’s finale, which wraps it with sentiments that range from melancholy to
unabashed sorrow. The epitaph, along with several other elements present in
these concluding pages (such as the light-hearted attitude adopted by Sancho,
the housekeeper, and the niece during our protagonist’s death throes (II.74, p.
1334; p. 980), stage a variant of the ritual killing of the elderly which was
accompanied by laughter (see De fiestas…, pp. 565–8; ‘“El espantajo…”’).
Laughter in these contexts associated with death serves as way of conferring
new life on the dead. In that sense, even though Don Quixote is officially left
mouldering in his grave at the end of Part II, Cervantes does not switch off the
underlying mechanism that has informed his entire project. Our author is, after
all, a master at having his cake and eating it too.
93 See, inter alia, Gómez Canseco, pp. 39*, 44*, and 69*.
94 See pp. 347–75, pp. 267–304, and pp. 305–27 (respectively).
95 See Close, Cervantes and…The one who does not fit well into that campaign
is Cervantes himself, as I have argued in ‘Laughter Tamed’. Nor does Mateo
Alemán, for that matter, despite Close’s arguments to the contrary. (He does
admit, however, that these two writers are ‘outliers’ with respect to the
academy-inflected ethos that characterizes all the rest.) It bears remembering
that both writers were born in 1547—a full three decades prior to the
appearance of what I have called the ‘Generation of 1580’. Apropos of that
issue, one of the most widely cited suspects whom I feel should be discarded
completely is Jerónimo de Pasamonte (born in 1553). While he may well be
attacked in Cervantes’s Part I under the guise of Ginés de Pasamonte, thus
giving him a motive to try to sabotage his fellow captive in Algiers, he simply
did not have the literary talent displayed by Avellaneda. Combined with his
serious mental instability (see González Duro, pp. 213–15), writing something
like the Segundo tomo would simply have been out of the question. Nor, for that
matter, does he conform to the ideological/sociological portrait that we can put
together on the basis of textual evidence.
96 Gómez Canseco, p. 63*.
97 Going a bit overboard, Alain-René Lesage claimed that the Segundo tomo (a
translation of which he published in 1704) is actually better than Cervantes’s
work. He said so, of course, from the perspective of Neoclassical poetics, which
emphasized the importance of decorum—that is, general suitability and internal
coherence of the characters (De fiestas…, pp. 576–9). Cervantes’s Don Quixote
and Sancho are not as internally consistent, and ‘believable’, as Avellaneda’s.
98 See Gómez Canseco, pp. 568–71. For a relatively recent translation into
English, see Server and Keller.
Chapter 8
Don Quixote de la Mancha’s
Narrative Structure within the
Literary Tradition
Yolanda Iglesias
University of Toronto
The objective of this study is to present the meaning, complexity,
innovation, and relevance of Don Quixote’s narrative structure within
the literary tradition. First, this chapter reviews the diverse
perspectives and interpretations among scholars when attempting to
establish the narrative structure created by Cervantes. It highlights the
directions in which scholars have, over time, argued about the
narrative structure of Don Quixote, to show how some enigmas remain
unsolved. Second, this piece re-examines previous literature with the
goal of solving some of the unexplained gaps in the narrative and
framing the relevance of the structure in Don Quixote, which is one of
the main pillars supporting the argument that Cervantes’s masterpiece
is the first modern novel.
Within the literary tradition, some scholars, particularly Anglo-
Hispanic academics, have argued that Don Quixote cannot be
considered the first modern novel.1 The main reason given is that the
episodic nature of the work is related more to the picaresque and
chivalric romance than it is to the modern novel.2 But, Cascardi, for
example, disagrees and argues that all previous literature used by
Cervantes is transformed in Don Quixote ‘by [its] displacement in time
and space and by their situation relative to other discourses undergoing
a similar process of rearticulation’.3
A review of the tradition will help us understand why the use of
both the picaresque and chivalric romance does not detract from the
consideration of Don Quixote as the first modern novel, as some critics
have argued. First, it can be stated that these earlier genres are not the
only sources for Don Quixote because most of the genres in the
European tradition influenced the creation of Cervantes’s masterpiece.
As defined by Mancing, Don Quixote ‘has been called a compendium, or
anthology, of Spanish Renaissance literature, in the sense that almost
every type of poetry, theatre, and prose fiction written in Spain in the
sixteenth century has some place in the novel’.4 Cervantes was very
familiar with the literary traditions that preceded him and reflected
many of them in his work.5 For example, the author of Don Quixote had
an extensive background in the Bible, Greek and Roman literature,
history, mythology, and culture.6 However, the principal influences on
Cervantes are Spanish.7 In particular, it is true that Don Quixote could
not have been possible ‘without the romance of chivalry, which
Cervantes, like his protagonist, had read extensively and almost knew
by heart’.8 In addition to the literary sources, the author of Don Quixote
drew heavily upon a vast store of folklore to create characters such as
Sancho Panza. Furthermore, Cervantes ‘may well have had first-hand
contact with the Arabic tradition of storytelling, especially during his
years of captivity in Algiers’ as seen in the figure of the Arabic historian
Cide Hamete Benengeli.9 Foreign influences such as Italian writers were
also important, particularly when he was stationed in Italy during his
years in the army.10
As Mancing states, the romance of chivalry offered only a starting
point for the novel.11 This literature is what comprises the creation of
Don Quixote, which is ‘a comic tale of a man who believes in chivalry,
thinks that traditional characters such as Amadís de Gaula and Belianís
de Grecia are historical figures, and attempts to become a knight-errant
himself’.12 However, as Cascardi argues, ‘no matter which way the
picture is turned the Quixote remains a watershed work in the history
of literature’.13 We can even consider that Cervantes himself most likely
could not have known that, in writing Don Quixote, he was initiating
the most valuable literary genre of the modern age: ‘it can
retrospectively be said that, among novels, Don Quixote was the first’.14
As the Romantics perceived, the novel’s form was, in effect, the
principle of its creation: ‘the “invention” of the novel resulted from the
re-fashioning of literary genres already in place, and Don Quixote stands
in relation to the origins of the novel not as the invention of something
radically new, but as the uncovering of new possibilities for the
combination of elements that pre-existed it’.15 However, Cervantes’s
most important strategy is the creativity of tradition. Don Quixote
‘begins with a frank acknowledgment of the weight of the literary past,
which the writer bears as a burden. Cervantes imagines the problem of
literary invention as a struggle between authority and innovation’.16 In
summary, Don Quixote’s concept of chivalry and its understanding of
the romances of chivalry are merely a departure point, but they are not
categories by which Don Quixote can be framed because it is built from
the re-formulation of previous genres.
Among other literary innovations in Don Quixote, such us the
combination of traditional literature, different type of speeches, and
verisimilitude, the narrative structure can be considered one of the
main elements that contributed to the creation of the first modern
novel.17 In addition to the literary tradition in Don Quixote, the
humour, irony, evolution of the characters, and social criticism, the
narrative structure designed by the novel’s author is one of the most
important links for categorising the text as the first modern novel. As
George Haley notes, Cervantes found a subject in the chivalric
romances that was ripe for parody and with it, ‘a way of telling stories
that called for the same treatment. He made them both serve the ends
of comic enjoyment and instruction in Don Quijote’.18 Nevertheless, in
the process of making fun of the narrative technique of the chivalric
novelists, ‘Cervantes used and enlarged it with such skill that, in his
hands, the overworked devices became expressive instruments once
more’.19 Furthermore, ‘Don Quixote is nothing if not a supremely
complex text when it comes to narrative structure’.20 As Cascardi has
stated, Cervantes invents the novel by refocusing the discourses of the
pastoral, chivalric, and picaresque genres, among others, from ‘their
original location in culture and into the domain of self-conscious
parody and pastiche…The convergence of different literary and
linguistic forms, and the fashioning of new from old, creates the effect
of a dazzling, dizzying literary complexity that criticism about the
novel has always had a difficult time tracking’.21
The narrative structure in Don Quixote has fascinated readers over
time. According to scholars, the game of narrative voices designed by
Cervantes has been essential in the determination that Don Quixote is
the first modern novel. However, the fascination with the narrative
structure of Don Quixote extends beyond the implications of genre. The
power of attraction increases due to the disagreement or the diversity
of interpretations offered with regard to the narrative structure of the
book. We readers have not all equally understood the narrative game
chosen by Cervantes due to the difficulty involved in identifying some
of the voices in the narration.
Let us examine the narrative structure created by Cervantes to
understand the differences among scholars. An anonymous voice in the
1605 prologue claims to be the stepfather rather than the father of the
text. A second, different voice narrates the first eight chapters. At the
end of Chapter 8, a third voice appears to inform the reader that the
second voice did not continue the story of Don Quixote because of a
lack of information. This third voice finds the continuation in a
manuscript written in Arabic characters. Consequently, he asks a
Spanish-Arabic bilingual convert (morisco aljamiado) to interpret it into
Castilian. This translator includes his own voice over the text with
commentaries to his transcription. This new manuscript starts exactly
at the point where the previous text, as far as we know in Latin
characters, was interrupted with the continuation of the adventure of
Don Quixote and the vizcaíno. The reader also finds out after Chapter 8
that Don Quixote de la Mancha was written by Cide Hamete Benengeli,
an Arabic historian.
The innovation and complexity of the structure emerges when
explaining who is who and which part of the text belongs to each voice.
The text presents the first enigma in need of an answer: who is the
stepfather and, consequently, the father of the story announced in the
prologue of 1605? Another puzzle emerges from the anonymous voice
of the first eight chapters because we do not know anything about him.
We do not specifically know whether this narration is the same as that
of Cide Hamete, the declared author of the history of Don Quixote in
I.9, or whether it is a different speaker. Another issue to be resolved is
why the first eight chapters are in Latin characters and the following in
Arabic characters. To date, this particular issue has not been explained
by scholars, as we observe below.
One innovation introduced by Cervantes is allowing the reader to
solve the puzzles and have fun with the novel’s narrative game.
Cervantes does not provide answers to these questions; there is no
answer to be given because it is interactive entertainment, a new
perspective, a new experiment. Ultimately, it is a complex narrative, as
the work of some scholars, over time, has revealed. One of the first
authors who studied the complexity of the structure in Don Quixote was
George Haley. He observed an unidentified ‘I’ who begins the narrative
and presents Don Quixote, only to profess at the end of the eighth
chapter that he must abandon his work and leave Don Quixote with his
sword poised in the air, because there is no more text.22 The
unidentified first intervention is followed by a segundo autor (second
author), ‘who takes over the “I” and the narrative with a description of
his experience as a frustrated reader of the first eight chapters who was
left impatient to know how the story ends’.23 Then, he tells us how he
found ‘the original Arabic manuscript’ and how, having been found, it
creates a new difficulty and suspense: how is the manuscript to be
read? This obstacle is surmounted after it is called to a morisco
aljamiado to render the text into Castilian.24 However, at the point
where the second author concludes this autobiographical detective
story and returns to where the adventure was interrupted, what he
gives the reader is his interpretation of the Moorish translator’s version
of the original Arabic manuscript.25 It is at this point that the creator of
the original composition appears: Cide Hamete Benengeli, Moor, and
Chronicler of the first instance of Don Quixote’s noble actions.26
However, one intermediary remains, according to Haley: ‘This is the
agent overlooked by those who like to equate the second author with
Cervantes. He is the shadowy figure who materializes at the end of
Chapter 8 to join the first author’s fragment to the second author’s
contribution and appears again in the final chapter of Part One to
supply the concluding remarks’.27 Simultaneously, he is also the most
distant intermediary drawn from Don Quixote’s adventures, while he is
the figure closest to the book and to the reader. The translator, in turn,
becomes the ‘reader made explicit within the novel, and he in turn
directs his translation and comments to his reader, the second author
who hired him to execute the translation’.28 For his part, the second
author is an amalgamation of both Cide Hamete’s theoretical reader
and the translator’s actual reader, and he designates himself as a
possible reader in his revision of the text.29
For Castro, there are multiple authors responsible for the first eight
chapters, which are reduced to one in Chapter 8, and called the second
author.30 Castro explains that it is the second author who finds the
name of the third one in a manuscript written in Arabic, whose author
is Cide Hamete Benengeli. The manuscript is then translated into
Castilian by an Arabic bilingual convert who can also be considered an
author due to the incorporation of his commentaries throughout the
translation.31
Ruth El Saffar focuses her attention on the dilemma of authorship in
the prologue of 1605. She argues that there exists a clear divorce
between Cervantes and this section as a strategy of elaboration in his
novel.32 Because Cervantes ‘clearly does not disclaim authorship of the
novel, the statement can only be understood as a self-conscious attempt
to divorce himself from his work while at the same time admitting his
in it. This process of simultaneously renouncing and admitting
involvement that which [sic] will be experienced by every fictional
narrator and dramatist throughout the novel.’33 Regarding the first
eight chapters, El Saffar asserts that they are narrated by an author
who refers to himself in the first person and this voice would
correspond to Cervantes, according to the reader.34 However, at the
end of Chapter 8, in the middle of an adventure with the vizcaíno, the
relationship between the narrator and the characters breaks down
because it seems that there are at least two writers throughout who are
conveying the story of Don Quixote; one author has written about Don
Quixote and his deeds, and a different one is introducing this story to
the reader.35
At this point, the reader’s attention moves from the matters of the
main character to the issue of the author because they have perceived
the different narrative voices, and the problem of the author of the first
eight chapters who had excused himself because he could find nothing
more about the deeds of Don Quixote.36 The author of the first eight
chapters is unnamed and ‘disappears as quickly as he appears, leaving
the task of telling the story of how the lost manuscript was recovered to
a character whom he calls the Second Author’.37 The unnamed
controlling author, who makes his short introduction at the end of
Chapter 8, and similar to Cervantes in the prologue, ‘is privileged to an
overview of the totality of the action that distinguishes him from the
characters who must discover their answers in the process of the
action’s unfolding’.38 He reveals his omniscience when he advises the
reader in the last paragraph of Chapter 8 that, as a result of the search,
the second author will narrate the following chapter. Therefore, the
reader knows in advance that the manuscript will be found, though the
second author provides details on how he found the story’s
continuation.39 Finally, the author who disappeared at the end of
Chapter 8 with the explanation that he had run out of material is
located and named in Chapter 9 as a result of the second author’s work.
In Chapter 9, the reader is introduced to Cide Hamete Benengeli, who
is a Moorish historian and the author of the history of Don Quixote.40
Nepaulsingh states that the main problem in identifying the
narrators arises because many critics do not believe in the existence of
Cide Hamete before Chapter 8.41 Nepaulsingh argues that Cide Hamete
is also the narrative voice of the first eight chapters and that the entire
novel is based on one version or another of the original manuscript
written by Cide Hamete.42 In other words, the truncated version of the
first eight chapters is edited without commentary by the second author,
who found the lost manuscript with the continuation. After this short
version, the responsibility of the second author increases. First, he hires
a translator to translate the text from Chapter 9 to the end of the
manuscript. Then, he edits and provides commentary on the translation
of his employee, the morisco aljamiado. In conclusion, he is responsible
for everything we read.43
According to Lathrop, the greatest confusion regarding the narrative
structure of Don Quixote is caused by the presence of the real author,
Cervantes, and a fictitious one, Cide Hamete. This unusual situation is
why academics confuse the real with the fictional and vice versa.44
Lathrop suggests that the narrative structure can be understood as
follows: in the world of fiction, in which Miguel de Cervantes, as the
real author, never lived, Cide Hamete was the charming, wise, fictitious
author of the story of Don Quixote. Cide Hamete was the author who
wrote the manuscript in Arabic that was translated into Spanish by a
Moorish aljamiado and revised by the narrator.45
Mancing attempts to resolve the conflict by arguing that Cervantes
must be the narrator because he uses ‘yo’ [‘I’], the first-person singular
pronoun, and because the person who writes the prologue must be the
same as the ultimate or final author.46 Mancing agrees with Riley that,
for practical purposes, ‘the author of the final, edited text which we
read is Miguel de Cervantes’.47 The narrative structure, then, may be
summarized as follow: after I.8, the Moorish historian Cide Hamete
records the events in the lives of Don Quixote and Sancho Panza. The
historian’s Arabic manuscript is then translated into Spanish by an
unnamed morisco. Finally, the Spanish version is edited by Miguel de
Cervantes.48
Parr proposes that the voices in Don Quixote can be divided into two
groups: mimetic and textual.49 The mimetic voice is derived from the
verbal imitation and representation. The textual voice stems from
certain functions of the text itself; in other words, from the written
speech—the text neither specifies who speaks nor embodies the
speaker.50 The author differentiates three classes of mimetic voice:
dialogue, narration (by an identifiable narrator), and the author’s
discourse.51 By contrast, the textual voice is derived from the most
striking elements of the text, thus making it a source of meaning.52 To
resolve the issues concerning the narrative structure of Don Quixote,
Parr focuses his attention on the mimetic voices of the implied author
and the different narrators. According to Parr, the narrative hierarchy
of Don Quixote may be understood as follows: first, there is the inferred
author, who can be identified immediately after the end of the book
because this voice marks the integration of the textual and mimetic
voices that flow into them. However, this author can only be identified
after a thorough reading of the text.53 Second, there is an implicit
author, who is unidentifiable and is found in unofficial elements such
as prologues, titles, loyalties, verses, and chapter lists.54 Third, there is
an anonymous historian who narrates the first eight chapters, who
disappears, and from whom we do not hear again after he runs out of
material. Fourth, the voice of the super narrator appears from Chapter
8 to the end of the novel; it is anonymous and remains in complete
control of the text and the remaining voices.55 This particular voice
introduces Cide Hamete Benengeli, who is portrayed as the fictitious
author, always under the control of the super narrator.56 There is also
the issue of the translator who is responsible for translating from
Chapter 9 to the end. Parr disagrees with Mancing, in particular, and
with the scholars who reduce the voices to the same person:
Cervantes.57
Fernández Mosquera, in line with other scholars, explains that the
narrative structure of Don Quixote is formed by an author of the first
eight chapters, an editor, a translator, Cide Hamete Benengeli, and a
definitive author. However, one of his strongest assertions states that
Cide Hamete cannot be the author of the first eight chapters, as some
scholars have suggested. Unfortunately, the critic does not go into
detail to support his claims, particularly regarding his argument that
Benengeli may not be the author of the first eight chapters because,
strictly speaking and based on the novel, he had not yet been born.58
He also disagrees with scholars who argue that the first eight chapters
are Cervantes’s on the grounds that they do not have a better
argument.59 Fernández Mosquera highlights that the voice of the first
eight chapters is neither Cervantes’s nor Cide Hamete’s, though the
latter shares some characteristics with Cervantes.60 In short, this voice
belongs to an author about whom we know practically nothing and
who occasionally hides himself behind the use of the third-person
singular.61
Fernández Mosquera identifies the voice of a second author after
Chapter 8 as a Christian editor responsible for printing and editing the
text. This editor, in turn, can also be called an author because he
incorporates his own commentary on the translation.62 The voice of
Cide Hamete is introduced by the Christian editor and is the author of
the history of Don Quixote, or at least of the most important part, which
accounts for the inclusion of other hands such as the editor and
translator.63 Finally, Fernández Mosquera proposes the presence of an
autor definitivo [definitive author] who is responsible for the entire
story, is omniscient, and has complete control of the fictitious
authors.64
In 1991, Avalle-Arce presented the notion that Sansón Carrasco
could be the narrator of the story. According to Avalle-Arce, Cervantes
is the narrator of the prologue, an unknown voice in the first eight
chapters, and Cide Hamete Benengeli is responsible for the rest of Part I
and the beginning of Part II.65 From this moment to the end, the critic
argues that some unusual things happen and that Benengeli is removed
from the story, as specifically observed when Sansón Carrasco enters,
informing the main characters of the news that their history has been
printed and was written by Cide Hamete.66 Avalle-Arce argues than
Sansón Carrasco is uniquely responsible for Don Quixote’s third sally in
search of adventures, complicit with the priest and the barber.67 The
scholar explains that during a conversation between Don Quixote and
Sancho, Sansón Carrasco comes in and supports the third sally as
follows:
Quedaron en esto y en que la partida sería de allí a ocho días. Encargó
don Quijote al bachiller la tuviese secreta, especialmente al cura y a
maese Nicolás, y a su sobrina y al ama, porque no estorbasen su
honrada y valerosa determinación. Todo lo prometió Carrasco. Con esto
se despidió, encargando a don Quijote que de todos sus buenos o malos
sucesos le avisase, habiendo comodidad, y así se despidieron, y Sancho
fue a poner en orden lo necesario para su jornada. (Emphasis mine)
[They agreed to this, and to the knight’s departing in eight days. Don
Quixote asked the bachelor to keep this secret, especially from the
priest and Master Nicolás, and from his niece and housekeeper, so that
they would not interfere with his honourable and valiant resolve.
Carrasco promised he would, and then he took his leave, asking Don
Quixote to keep him informed, when possible, of all his successes and
failures; and so they said goodbye, and Sancho left to make
preparations for their journey.]68 (Emphasis mine)
Avalle-Arce highlights how, through the promise made by Carrasco to
Don Quixote, Cervantes constructs an original ideal to give way to the
third sally.69
Finally, Stoopen argues that the authors in the prologue (the
apparent author and the friend) differ from other voices of the
narration.70 She notes the presence of a Castilian and an Arabic author,
the former used to comment and criticize the latter.71 Although
Stoopen does not state as much explicitly, it can be understood that the
Castilian voice corresponds to the author of the first eight chapters and
the Arabic to Cide Hamete. Both are related by juxtaposition with the
presence of the second author, who has the role of gathering both
voices between the narrative discourses.72
This review reveals that there are different directions, terminology,
and uncertainties regarding the narrative structure of Don Quixote.73 In
contribution to this discourse, I would like to offer another possible
variation on the previous schemes. In the process, I will try to answer
the unsolved puzzle of why the first eight chapters are written in
Castilian with Latin characters and the rest in Castilian as well but in
Arabic characters. My narrative proposal would be as follows: all of the
narrative voices in Don Quixote are fictional. The first author is Cide
Hamete Benengeli who is the responsible for Parts I and II. There is a
second author who edits the story, and who writes both prologues as
well. Finally, I consider the whole novel to have been written in
Castilian but in Arabic characters. Therefore, we have two translators
translating the text into Latin characters. The first one is anonymous
and is responsible for Chapters 1 to 8, and the second translator is the
morisco aljamiado, who translates the rest of the story, written in
Castilian but in Arabic characters. Let’s explain how the narrative
structure works.
The first narrative voice found in the text appears in the prologue
and belongs not to Cide Hamete but rather to the editor of the history
of Don Quixote and narrator of the prologue. The creation of this
section and the incorporation of his ideas and opinions into the main
plot of the story allow us to designate him as an author as well. He may
be called an editor-author, or the author who is responsible for the final
version, the one that we read. According to Maestro, the prologue of
1605 is a fictional discourse, given that it is written in dialogue form
and its content is not verifiable.74 We can consider the prologue to be
another fictional element designed by Cervantes to build the narrative
structure in harmony with the rest of the novel. The true author,
Cervantes, assigns the prologues to the editor, who uses this narrative
to convey the guidelines for understanding this fictional game to the
reader. It is precisely in the prologue where he confesses that he is the
stepfather of the story: ‘Pero yo, que, aunque parezco padre, soy
padrastro de don Quijote’ [‘But though I seem to be the father, I am the
stepfather of Don Quixote’], because the father, as we will see, is Cide
Hamete Benengeli.75 The prologues are more than an introduction; they
are instructions on how to read the novel. They are a kind of dialogue
that the editor wants to maintain with the reader, which is why the
editor starts with a salutation to the audience, ‘Desocupado lector’
[‘Idle reader’], and closes the prologue with a farewell: ‘Y con esto,
Dios te dé salud, y a mí no olvide. Vale’ [‘And having said this, may
God grant you health and forget me. Vale’].76
Outside the prologue, the presence of this editor-author is initially
found at the end of Chapter 8. He appears to inform the readers that
the author of the story in the first eight chapters leaves the Biscayan
adventure unfinished. Furthermore, he explains that the excuse given
by the author is that he has no more story to tell: ‘Pero está el daño de
todo esto que en este punto y término deja pendiente el autor desta
historia esta batalla, disculpándose que no halló más escrito destas
hazañas de don Quijote de las que deja referidas’ [‘But the difficulty in
all this is that at this very point and juncture, the author of the history
leaves the battle pending, apologizing because he found nothing else
written about the feats of Don Quixote other than what he has already
recounted’].77 The editor-author, who has been editing the first eight
chapters, cannot continue because there is nothing more to edit. Herein
lies one of the puzzles of the novel: how is it possible that an author
can say that he cannot continue with his own story because nothing
more has been written? We have to continue reading to explain the
enigma.
The editor-author cannot believe that the story ends here.
Accordingly, he decides to find the rest of the manuscript. He narrates
this search himself:
Bien es verdad que el segundo autor desta obra no quiso creer que tan
curiosa historia estuviese entregada a las leyes del olvido, ni que
hubiesen sido tan poco curiosos los ingenios de la Mancha que no
tuviesen en sus archivos o en sus escritos papeles que deste famoso
caballero tratasen; y así, con esta imaginación, no se desesperó de hallar
el fin desta apacible historia, el cual, siéndole el cielo favorable, le halló
del modo que se contará en la segunda parte. (Emphasis mine)
[It is certainly true that the second author of this work did not want to
believe that so curious a history would be subjected to the laws of
oblivion, or that the great minds of La Mancha possessed so little
interest that they did not have in their archives or writing tables a few
pages that dealt with this famous knight; and so, with this thought in
mind, he did not despair of finding the conclusion to this gentle history,
which, with heaven’s help, he discovered in the manner that will be
revealed in part two.]78 (Emphasis mine)
As observed above, the mention of a ‘second author’ has created
another enigma. It can, however, be explained if we take the literal
meaning of the paragraph. In other words, the editor-author defines
himself as a ‘second author’. He refers to himself as a ‘second author’
because he is very conscious of his active participation in the plot of
the story and decides to exert all his strength in finding the rest of the
manuscript. His contribution to the text is such that he engages the
reader, narrating his own quest in his own words:
Estando yo un día en el Alcaná de Toledo, llegó un muchacho a vender
unos cartapacios y papeles viejos a un sedero; y como yo soy aficionado
a leer, aunque sean los papeles rotos de las calles, llevando desta mi
natural inclinación, tomé un cartapacio de las que el muchacho vendía,
y vile con caracteres que conocí ser arábigos. Y puesto que aunque los
conocía no los sabía leer, anduve mirando si parecía por allí algún
morisco aljamiado que los leyese, y no fue muy dificultoso hallar
intérprete semejante, pues aunque le buscara de otra mejor y más
antigua lengua le hallara. En fin, la suerte me deparó uno, que,
diciéndole mi deseo y poniéndole el libro en las manos, le abrió por
medio, y leyendo un poco en él, se comenzó a reír.
[One day when I was in the Alcaná market in Toledo, a boy came by to
sell some notebooks and old papers to a silk merchant; as I am very
fond of reading, even torn papers in the streets, I was moved by my
natural inclinations to pick up one of the volumes the boy was selling,
and I saw that it was written in characters I knew to be Arabic. And since I
recognized but could not read it, I looked around to see if some Morisco
who knew Castilian, and could read it for me, was in the vicinity and it
was not very difficult to find this kind of interpreter, for even if I had
sought a speaker of a better and older language, I would have found
him. In short, fortune provided me with one, and when I told him what
I wanted and placed the book in his hands, he opened it in the middle,
read for a short while, and began to laugh.]79
It can be highlighted here that the old manuscript found by the editor-
author was written in Arabic characters not in Arabic (language), as the
scholars mentioned above have been holding.
The editor-author (or ‘second author’ as he calls himself) is then
curious as to why the morisco aljamiado is laughing and, in his own
words, explains it was because of something written in the margin of
the book as an annotation on Dulcinea del Toboso.80 The editor-author
expresses that he is astonished because he knew that this was the
manuscript for which he was searching. He asks the translator to read
the beginning of the story, and he is the one who reveals the name of
the author: ‘Historia de don Quijote de la Mancha, escrita por Cide Hamete
Benengeli, historiador arábido’ [‘History of Don Quixote of La Mancha,
written by Cide Hamete Benengeli, an Arab historian’].81 The editor-author
then hires the morisco aljamiado to translate the entire manuscript. We
now know that the author of the story is Cide Hamete; authorship that
can be attributed to Parts I and II because no one has said otherwise.
We might claim that the problem of authorship has been solved.
One issue, however, remains to be solved: why are the first eight
chapters in Latin characters and the rest of the story in Arabic
characters? A possible explanation is that the author of the entire
history of Don Quixote is Cide Hamete, who writes the complete story in
Castilian but in Arabic characters. The first eight chapters were
translated into Latin characters by an anonymous translator.
Unfortunately, we know nothing about him because he did not include
any particular information. The only words uttered by the anonymous
translator are those that explain that he cannot continue because the
manuscript does not contain any more information. Therefore, it is the
voice of this anonymous translator who provides this information and
not an anonymous author, as most critics have argued. We do not know
where the original manuscript, with the first eight chapters written in
Arabic characters, could be. This issue is an enigma that we most likely
cannot solve because nothing is mentioned about the text, or maybe
Cervantes intentionally does not want the issue resolved. After the first
anonymous translator, there is a second one: the morisco aljamiado. The
intervention of this translator is different from his predecessor because
he includes his own textual interpretations and commentary. In so
doing, he takes on the role of an additional author.
In summary, it can be claimed that the complete manuscript was
written in Castilian but in Arabic characters by Cide Hamete Benengeli,
an Arabic historian. We cannot be certain whether the entire
manuscript was initially translated into Latin characters because we
only have the first eight chapters, which were translated by an
anonymous translator. This anonymous translation is the text in the
hands of the editor-author, which he edited. He himself found the
continuation in Castilian but in Arabic characters, that is, the original.
He hired a translator/interpreter, the morisco aljamiado, who, in
addition to the translation, includes commentary and opinions in the
text. To complete his job as editor-author, he writes both prologues to
frame the story. We can say that the version we are reading is the
version that was edited by the person to whom he refers by himself as
the ‘second author’.
Cervantes’s objective in creating this fictional narrative game is
threefold. The first goal is to entertain and capture the attention of his
readers. The second objective is to maintain some distance from the
content of the story, particularly the social aspects criticized in the
novel. The third purpose is to offer an innovative narrative structure
that differs from previous literature. Cervantes’s narrative game is to
create Cide Hamete as the sole author of Don Quixote’s adventures. The
actual author, Cervantes, uses him to discredit the apocryphal Don
Quixote of Avellaneda, to provide social criticism, and to distance
himself from the characters in the story. Cervantes proposes a new way
of reading and participating in a novel. He introduces a complex
structure that, even today, has unsolved narrative issues. It is a game
that still presents questions about the fictional authorship of Don
Quixote. This complexity and innovation within the literary tradition
allow us to argue that Don Quixote is the first modern novel.
This study is best concluded with a statement by Anthony Close:
‘Cervantes’s masterpiece contributes significantly to the birth of the
genre in the first half of the eighteenth century, and ever since then,
has been a model for general theories of it as well as an inspiration to
novelists.’82
Works Cited
Avalle-Arce, Juan Bautista. ‘Las voces del narrador’. Ínsula 538 (1991): pp. 4–6.
Canavaggio, Jean. ‘Cervantes en primera persona’. Journal of Hispanic Philology
2, no. 1 (1977): pp. 35–44.
Cascardi, Anthony J. ‘Don Quixote and the Invention of the Novel’. In The
Cambridge Companion to Cervantes, edited by Cascardi (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2002), pp. 58–79.
Castro, Américo. ‘El cómo y el por qué de Cide Hamete Benengeli’. In Hacia
Cervantes (Madrid: Taurus, 1967), pp. 409–19.
Cervantes, Miguel de. Don Quijote de la Mancha, edited by John J. Allen
(Madrid: Cátedra, 2015).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Don Quixote, translated by Edith Grossman and edited by
Harold Bloom (New York: Harper Collins Publisher, 2003).
Close, Anthony J. ‘Don Quixote and the Modern Novel’. In A Companion to Don
Quixote. (Rochester, NY: Tamesis, 2008), pp. 227–53.
Dotras, Ana M. ‘Cervantes: Don Quijote de la Mancha’. In La novela española de
metaficción (Madrid: Ediciones Júcar, 1994), pp. 33–64.
El Saffar, Ruth. ‘The Dynamics of Character-Author-Reader Interaction in Don
Quixote’. In Distance and Control in Don Quixote. A Study in Narrative Technique
(Chapel Hill: North Carolina Studies in the Romance Languages and
Literatures, 1975), pp. 15–44.
Fernández Mosquera, Santiago. ‘Los autores ficticios del Quijote’. Anales
Cervantinos, XXIV (1986): pp. 56–63.
Gerli, E. Michael. ‘Estilo, perspectiva, y realidad: Don Quijote, I, 8–9’. In
Cervantes, su obra y su mundo. Actas del I Congreso Internacional sobre
Cervantes, edited by Manuel Criado del Val (Madrid: EDI-6, 1981), pp. 629–
34.
Haley, George. ‘The Narrator in Don Quixote: Maese Pedro’s Puppet Show’. MLN
80 (1965): pp. 145–65.
Lathrop, Thomas. ‘Cide Hamete Benengeli y su manuscrito’. In Cervantes, su obra
y su mundo. Actas del I congreso internacional sobre Cervantes, edited by Manuel
Criado del Val (Madrid, EDI-6, 1981), pp. 693–7.
Maestro, Jesús G. ‘El sistema narrativo del Quijote: La construcción del
personaje Cide Hamete Benengeli’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society
of America 15, no. 1 (1995): pp. 111–41.
Mancing, Howard. ‘Cide Hamete Benengeli vs. Miguel de Cervantes: The
Metafictional Dialectic of Don Quijote’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes
Society of America 1, nos. 1–2 (1981): pp. 63–82.
Mancing, Howard. ‘Ideas’. In Cervantes’s Don Quixote: A Reference Guide
(Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2006), pp. 87–124.
Martín Morán, José Manuel. ‘La débil autoridad del padrastro del Quijote’. In
Actas del III Congreso Internacional de la Asociación de Cervantistas (Menorca,
20–25 de octubre de 1997), edited by Antonio Bernat Vistarini (Palma:
Universitat de les Illes Balears, 1998), pp. 277–96.
Martín, Morán, José Manuel. ‘La novela moderna en el Quijote’. Cervantes:
Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 27, no. 1 (2007): pp. 201–26.
Nepaulsingh, Colbert. ‘La aventura de los narradores en el Quijote’. In Actas del
VI Congreso de la AIH (Toronto, 22–26 de agosto de 1977), edited by Alan M.
Gordon and Evelyn Rugg (Toronto: University of Toronto, 1980), pp. 515–18.
Parr, James A. ‘Las voces del Quijote y la subversión de la autoridad’. In Actas
del VIII Congreso de la AIH (Brown University, 22–27 de agosto de 1983), edited
by A. David Kossoff, José Amor y Vázquez, Ruth H. Kossoff, and Geoffrey W.
Ribbans (Madrid: Istmo, 1986), pp. 401–8.
Price, Lisa. ‘Cervantes y el poder de la narración’. Anales Cervantinos 31 (1993):
pp. 247–51.
Riley, E. C. Cervantes’s Theory of the Novel (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1962).
Stoopen, María. ‘El amplio espectro de la tríada autores, libro, lectores en el
Quijote’. In Volver a Cervantes. Actas del TV Congreso Internacional de la
Asociación de Cervantistas (Lepante, 1–8 de octubre de 2000), edited by Antonio
Bernat Vistarin (Palma: Universitat de les Illes Balears, 2001): pp. 545–52.
1 Martín Morán, ‘La novela moderna…’ p. 222.
2 Martín Morán, ‘La novela moderna…’ p. 222.
3 Cascardi, p. 64.
4 Mancing, ‘Ideas’, p. 87.
5 Mancing, ‘Ideas’, p. 87.
6 Mancing, ‘Ideas’, 87–8; among classical writers, those who influenced
Cervantes most ‘are the Greeks Homer and Heliodorus, and the Romans Virgil,
Ovid, and Apuleius’ (p. 88).
7 For example, Cervantes knew the pastoral, such as La Diana, the only two
picaresque novels published, Lazarillo de Tormes and Guzmán de Alfarache, and
the historical fiction about Muslim Spain (Mancing, ‘Ideas’, pp. 88–9). Another
source was Alonso Fernández de Avellaneda’s Don Quixote, which the author
incorporated into Part II of Don Quixote. He had contact with poets such as
Francisco de Herrera, Luis de Góngora, the Argensola brothers Bartolomé and
Lupercio, and Lope de Vega (pp. 88–9). Cervantes was influenced by the
Spanish physician Juan Huarte de San Juan’s influential medical treatise
Examen de ingenios para las ciencias [Scientific Examination of Men’s Wits] in the
creation of Don Quixote’s madness (see Chapter 13 of this volume).
Furthermore, he was familiar with the writer Alonso López Pinciano and his
work on aesthetics (pp. 89–90).
8 Mancing, ‘Ideas’, p. 88.
9 Mancing, ‘Ideas’, p. 90.
10 Some Italian influences are the epic chivalric poems of Matteo Maria
Boiardo, Ludovico Ariosto, Francesco Petrarca, Luigi Pulci, Boccaccio, Bandello,
and Giraldi Cinzio (Mancing, ‘Ideas’, pp. 90–1).
11 Mancing, ‘Ideas’, p. 93.
12 Mancing, ‘Ideas’, p. 93.
13 Cascardi, p. 58.
14 Cascardi, p. 58.
15 Cascardi, p. 59.
16 Cascardi, p. 63.
17 See Cascardi, Close, Mancing ‘Ideas’, Martín Morán, ‘La novela’, and Riley.
18 Haley, p. 145.
19 Haley, p. 145.
20 Cascardi, p. 75.
21 Cascardi, p. 64.
22 Haley, p. 146.
23 Haley, p. 146.
24 Haley, p. 146.
25 Haley, p. 146–7.
26 Haley, p. 147.
27 Haley, p. 148.
28 Haley, p. 148.
29 Haley, p. 148.
30 Castro, p. 416. Unfortunately, Castro does not give details about the
compositions of the different authors writing the first eight chapters since the
main objective of his study is the study of Cide Hamete.
31 Castro, p. 417.
32 El Saffar, p. 33.
33 El Saffar, p. 33.
34 El Saffar, p. 38.
35 El Saffar, p. 38.
36 El Saffar, pp. 38–9.
37 El Saffar, p. 39. The author writes ‘Second Author’ in uppercase.
38 El Saffar, pp. 39–40.
39 El Saffar, p. 40.
40 El Saffar, p. 41.
41 Nepaulsingh, p. 515.
42 Nepaulsingh, p. 515.
43 Nepaulsingh, p. 515.
44 Lathrop, p. 693.
45 Lathrop, p. 697.
46 Mancing, ‘Cide Hamete Benengali…’, p. 64.
47 Mancing, ‘Cide Hamete Benengali…’, p. 64.
48 Mancing, ‘Cide Hamete Benengali…’ p. 64.
49 Parr, p. 401.
50 Parr, p. 401.
51 Parr, p. 401.
52 For example, the sequence of chapters, the changes in different voices
without any advice, or the different compositors of the text.
53 Parr, p. 402.
54 Parr, p. 402.
55 Parr, pp. 402–3.
56 Parr, p. 403.
57 Parr, p. 406.
58 Fernández Mosquera, pp. 55–6.
59 Fernández Mosquera, p. 56.
60 Fernández Mosquera, p. 57.
61 Fernández Mosquera, p. 57.
62 Fernández Mosquera, pp. 57–9.
63 Fernández Mosquera, p. 60.
64 Fernández Mosquera, p. 63.
65 Avalle-Arce, p. 5.
66 Avalle-Arce, p. 5.
67 Avalle-Arce, p. 5.
68 Cervantes, Don Quijote II.4, p. 453; Don Quixote, p. 485.
69 Avalle-Arce, p. 5.
70 Stoopen, p. 546.
71 Stoopen, p. 546.
72 Stoopen, p. 546.
73 Other related studies to be consulted are: Canavaggio, Dotras, Gerli,
Martín Morán, ‘La débil…’, and Price.
74 Maestro, p. 115.
75 I.Prólogo, p. 31; p. 3.
76 I.Prólogo, p. 31–5; pp. 3–9.
77 I.8, p. 89; p. 64.
78 I.8, p. 89; pp. 64–5.
79 I.9, p. 92; p. 67 (emphasis mine in the original and the translation).
80 I.9, p. 92; p. 67.
81 I.9, p. 92; p. 67.
82 Close, p. 227.
Chapter 9
Don Quixote
Humour in Philosophy and Philosophy in
Humour
Donald Palmer
North Carolina State University
There is no need to treat the question of philosophy and humour in
Don Quixote as opposing options; rather, the question here will concern
how Cervantes manages to use humour (and, specifically, Baroque
humour) to treat philosophical issues, or use humour in ways that
invite philosophical analysis.1 There are at least five ways in which
philosophy appears in this humorous novel, or is tempted to intervene
in it. First, there is Cervantes’s familiarity with philosophical currents
in ancient Greek, medieval, and Renaissance philosophy, and his use of
them in his writings. Second, the thoughts, statements, and acts of
Cervantes’s hero position him in various philosophical stances, some of
them fairly radical (Don Quixote as philosopher). Third, the
employment by literary critics of more recent philosophical
developments as they read Cervantes’s novel providing insight into his
ideas, even if those philosophies are not necessarily found in the novel
itself. Fourth, we find philosophers of later generations analysing
Cervantes’s novel in ways that suggest new philosophical readings of it.
Fifth, we discover that certain ideas in Don Quixote anticipate future
philosophical developments. Below, I will provide examples of each of
these ways in which Don Quixote is philosophical or attracts
philosophical analysis. And, in doing so, I will argue that, in all cases,
the Knight of the Doleful Countenance (a.k.a. the Knight of the Lions)
appears in a positive light. I will show that one of the reasons for the
apparent modernity of Don Quixote is Cervantes’s comprehension of the
philosophical past and his eventual escape from its grasp through his
intellectual strategies, which are anticipatory of our own period. These
strategies are, of course, related both to the philosophical perspicacity
of the novel, and to its sharp humour.
In mock humility and self-deprecation, Cervantes informs his readers
both in his preface and conclusion that one of the weaknesses of his
book is that it lacks philosophy. The reader is informed that the sole
purpose of his novel is to satirize chivalric and pastoral works in order
to prevent foolish readers from taking this escapist literature seriously.
Mid-twentieth-century critics, most notably Erich Auerbach, Ramón
Menéndez Pidal, and translator J. M. Cohen, seem to take Cervantes at
his word, or deal with him merely as a humourist, asserting that there
was no political content to the novel.2 This implied that there was no
philosophical content either, because during the Counter-Reformation
no sensible author in Spain would dare to criticize either the monarchy,
the aristocracy, or the Church. Contemporary commentators, however,
point out that by Cervantes’s day the tide of literary interest in the
novels of chivalry had receded to the point that no 900-page book was
needed to warn against them, and these commentators have instead
looked for hidden political, social, and philosophical themes. Already,
in 1948, in the shadow of Franco’s censors, the important Spanish
historian José Antonio Maravall wrote Utopia y contrautopia en el
Quijote [Utopia and Counterutopia in the Quixote] in which he argued
that Cervantes’s book attacks not novels, ballads, romances, and
pastorals, but liberal reformers who directed their intellectual energy to
the imagination of utopian solutions to Spain’s disastrous conditions in
the Baroque period, thereby spending what transformational energy
there might have been on useless fantasies.
Although Maravall and other contemporary critics find social and
political satire in the Quixote, they do not find any serious attempt to
depict the mentality of the Middle Ages, thereby implying that there is
nothing to be learned about real medieval philosophy by reading
Cervantes’s text. Don Quixote, of course, detests ‘these our despicable
times’,3 and wishes to abolish them and return to the Middle Ages, but
his love of the Middle Ages itself does not seem a fruitful venue for a
study of the medieval world. After all, Quixote’s grasp of that world
seems to be based mainly on myth, fable, misunderstanding, invention,
or half-truth. The medieval period that Quixote maintains in his own
mind is one that never took place. Don Quixote is like other neo-
medievalists who invent their own version of the Middle Ages.
Nevertheless, I maintain that the medieval world’s conception of itself
was arrived at by making the kinds of historical, conceptual, religious,
and factual mistakes about its own condition that are very similar to
the ones made about it by Don Quixote himself. Many of the
foundational beliefs of medieval citizens trump even Don Quixote’s
imaginative creations. Perhaps all historical periods misunderstand
themselves—which is what Hegel surely meant when he wrote: ‘The
owl of Minerva flies only at dusk’4—but medieval populations seemed
better at self-deception than most populations.5
Medieval Epistemes, Foucault, and
Cervantes
The philosopher and historian Michel Foucault (1926–84) challenges
those who dismiss Don Quixote as someone who did not understand the
Middle Ages. According to Foucault, by reading Cervantes’s novel
attentively we learn about an important aspect of the medieval
mentality, one that Cervantes has grasped very well. In The Order of
Things, Foucault understands the major break between the medieval
world, on the one hand, and the worlds of the Renaissance and Baroque
periods, on the other, in terms of what he calls épistèmes, or epistemes.6
An episteme is a way of conceptualizing the world—a way of knowing
it and categorizing it. It is ‘a system of ordered surfaces and…planes’
whose function is ‘to tame the wild profusion of existing things’ for a
certain amount of time.7 Each episteme is a semiologically closed
reality. The episteme of the medieval world was one that obsessed over
the relationships among signs, and one that also believed that the
world itself was a semiotic system, a book—the Book of Nature—which
had been written by God himself and which must be constantly
consulted for signs of its author’s intentions. In the old world, all signs
pointed ultimately to God’s will, and therefore everything was
connected to everything else. That is, an understanding of the world
was based on analogy, which held reality together (analogy =
similitude, resemblance, sameness, metaphor, metonymy, etc.) while
the new episteme propagated from the Renaissance forward,
understands the world in terms of singularity, difference, and causal
linearity.
Nevertheless, even at their most powerful moment, all epistemes
threaten to collapse and to deconstruct themselves. Finally, like all
epistemes before it, the medieval episteme did collapse, similar to the
world of Wonderland just before Alice awoke from her dream, but in
slow motion, not all at once. Though the Renaissance utilized many of
the signs that were commonplace in the Middle Ages, they often did
not have the same meaning. By the beginning of the Baroque period,
analogy had lost its explanatory power, and ‘the play of resemblance’
was replaced by identity, difference, and exactitude, as represented in
Descartes’s ‘clear and distinct ideas’, Galileo’s mathematical reductions,
and Bishop Butler’s depressing claim that ‘Everything is what it is, and
not another thing.’8
From within the new episteme, the old one, which not long before
had seemed to be the natural way of understanding the world, now
appeared archaic, laughable, and even mad. Don Quixote is a
throwback to the earlier episteme. Alas, his defence of it arrives too
late. With the collapse of the old world, ‘resemblances and signs have
dissolved their former alliance…words wander off on their own’, no
longer able to serve their function as proof of the oneness of things.9
According to Foucault, Don Quixote travels in that empty space
between things and the newly liberated words, gathering them together
again, trying to press them into their old service. But this service is now
the service of folly.
According to Foucault, Quixote ‘inhabits the Sovereignty of the
Same’, and is the hero of that now-lost realm—and with it was lost a
sense of oneness with the world, a sense that Cervantes and other
Baroque poets tried to recover. Quixote’s job, as he sees it, is to re-
establish a system of meaning in ‘this our detestable age’, by becoming
the defender of poetry itself; poets (or, at least, Baroque poets) and
madmen (at least, Baroque madmen) are subversive of the new
episteme. If Foucault is right about this, as I believe he is, then in order
to comprehend medieval philosophy we must contextualize it in terms
of its various epistemes, and specifically the one that prioritizes
analogy as knowledge. Our expert in this domain can well be Don
Quixote de la Mancha.
Cervantes and the Greeks
Cervantes was familiar not only with the philosophical mentality of the
Middle Ages but with a number of the philosophers of ancient Greece,
including some of the pre-Socratic philosophers. In Part II, Chapter 41,
the duke and duchess, who have invited their friends to mock the
knight and his squire, inform them that a certain Countess Trifaldi has
come from a distant land seeking the succour of Don Quixote. Her
plight is that she and all of her waiting-women have had a spell cast
upon them that has caused them to grow thick black beards; the
‘Countess’ and her ladies are, of course, men in disguise. They can only
be disenchanted if Don Quixote and Sancho agree to be blindfolded and
ride the magic wooden horse Clavileño to the outer realm of the
universe, leaving the realm of earth, passing through the realms of
water, fire, and air, which, conveniently, is the plan of the universe laid
out by the pre-Socratic philosopher, Anaximander (c.610–c.546 bc).
Once the knight and his squire are blindfolded and mounted upon the
horse, the Duke and his friends throw water on the riders, brush them
with torches, and blow giant billows on them as they pass through
these ontological realms, reversing the process as they return to the
realm of earth. Upon their return knight and squire are allowed to
remove their blindfolds, finding that the disenchanted smooth-faced
and beautiful ladies had disappeared and returned to their native land
as soon as Don Quixote and Sancho reached the edge of the universe.
Plato crops up in this story as well. Earlier, the countess tells how
she had once been seduced by a honey-tongued poet, whose verses
‘overpowered’ her and threw her ‘to the ground’. As a result, she has
concluded that ‘from virtuous and harmonious republics poets must be
banished, as Plato advised’.10 Indeed, as is well known, in Book X, the
final chapter of the Republic, Plato has Socrates ‘banish poetry from our
city’.11
Cascardi has pointed out that there is another episode in Don Quixote
that makes direct reference to Plato’s banishment of artists from the
republic. In Chapter 47 of Part I, the canon of Toledo launches his
famous diatribe against the romances of chivalry, which he describes as
‘harmful to the republic’.12 Notice that if Cervantes’s true objective in
writing Don Quixote is to banish the novels of chivalry from the Spanish
republic, then here he is playing the role of Plato. Yet his method of
banishing all chivalric novels is to write another chivalric novel.
Consider Plato’s ontological ladder presented in Book VI of the
Republic, now called the Simile of the Line.13 According to the Simile,
there is a hierarchy of reality, divided radically between the intelligible
world on top and the material world below, the material world being
an imitation (mimesis) of the intelligible world (hence, less real than the
original). Yet each of the two worlds is again split into two divisions
that are defined by the same formula of original and copy. At the
highest level, hence the most real level, are the Forms, eternally
unchanging archetypes such as Truth, Justice, and Beauty. Below this
level, which only philosophers can know, there is a world of
mathematical-like concepts that are mental copies of the Forms (e.g.
the concepts of truth, justice, and beauty). They are mathematical in
that math itself is the primary example of conceptual perfection, also in
that all concepts here can be defined with mathematical precision. The
physical world, being a flawed copy of the intelligible world, can be
understood only through these concepts. This lower world exhibits
itself as being in constant movement, because things in this world pass
from creation and birth to destruction and death. It is a Heraclitian
world in constant flux, while the intelligible world is Parmenidean—
nothing ever changes; all is eternally the same.
The lowest of the four levels of reality consists of copies of the
material world: images, reflections, and shadows. This is the realm
three times removed from Truth, and it is here that Plato locates
mimetic art. It is for this reason that he banishes the artist from the
ideal Republic. Art claims to be Truth, but it is a lie. It claims to be
based in Reason, but it is grounded in emotionality and stirs up Id-like
passions. Socrates discusses the base passions from which art derives
and to which it appeals. They are ‘aroused in sleep’, they are ‘bestial
and savage’:
[T]here is nothing [such desire] will not dare to do, thus freed and rid
of all shame and reason; it shrinks not from attempting in fancy to lie
with a mother, or with any other man or god or beast, shrinks from no
bloodshed, refrains from no food—in a word, leaves no folly or
shameless untried.14
Plato associated art with dreams. If art emerges from this dark part of
the soul and responds to the unconscious demands made there, then art
is, in a word, dangerous.
Aristotle defended the poet against Plato’s attack, reasoning that ‘the
historian relates what happened, the poet what might happen. That is
why poetry is more akin to philosophy and is a better thing than
history.’15 It is clear that Cervantes was familiar with this debate
between Aristotle and his former teacher. Cascardi points out that in
Don Quixote, II.3 Cervantes puts into Sansón Carrasco’s mouth
Aristotle’s words almost verbatim: ‘the poet can recount…things not as
they were, but as they should have been, and the historian must write
about them not as they should have been, but as they were, without
adding or subtracting anything from the truth.’16 The paradox here is
that the trickster, Bachelor Sansón Carrasco, utters these words in
describing to Don Quixote and Sancho the new book about their
adventures by the Arab historian Cide Hamete Benengeli, explaining
why Benengeli needed to include unflattering gaffs and embarrassments
in their history.
Sansón Carrasco is having fun with knight and squire by mocking
them while pretending to take them seriously. Because Sansón uses
Aristotle’s argument sophistically and maliciously, I doubt that we can
use this paraphrase of Aristotle’s poetics to argue that it proves that
Cervantes sides with Aristotle against Plato in their debate about the
value of art. None of this is meant to say that Cervantes is a fan of
Plato.17 Recall that Cervantes’s mention of Plato in Part II, when the
bearded Countess Trifaldi, lamenting that a poet once seduced ‘her’,
expresses ‘her’ agreement with Plato’s decision to expel all poets from
the republic. This reference to Plato appears in the context of yet
another mean trick against knight and squire, so that the duke and his
gaggle of lackeys can laugh uproariously at their foolishness. The duke
may be lampooning Don Quixote and Sancho, but it appears that
Cervantes is lampooning the ancient Greek philosophers—pre-Socratic
and Socratic—and perhaps is parodying philosophy itself. It is hunting
season in La Mancha, and all ideas are fair game. Yet this caricature too
is philosophical.
It can be said that Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900) spent all of his
sane life attacking Plato, from his first book to his last, attempting to
invert the Simile of the Line, to place art at the highest level of reality:
‘it is only as an esthetic phenomenon that existence and the world are
eternally justified’.18 Even Nietzsche’s attacks on Christianity are often a
form of anti-Platonism, as when he calls Christianity ‘Platonism for the
masses’.19 In Don Quixote everything that happens is indeed based on
transcendent ideals, on imitations of higher Forms. But these Forms are
not those that exist in the Platonic Heaven of Essences. The acts and
thoughts in Cervantes’s novel are imitations not of higher truths but of
other art—or artifice, as in the case of all of the fictitious knights errant
that Don Quixote mentions, imitates, or curses. In addition, according
to one critic, all art is a form of Donquixoteism,20 which is tantamount
to saying all art is a lie. I would say that on the Cervantine/Nietzschean
Simile of the Line, art of one sort or another is the highest form, and
everything else is a copy of art, hence, also being art. There is a
disturbing syllogistic conclusion here: everything is a lie—disturbing
partly because it plunges us into the Cretan Liar’s paradox.21 Nietzsche
himself was accused of taking such a plunge, as were the Sophists in
Socrates’s time, and Jacques Derrida in our time.
Don Quixote: Modernism and
Postmodernism
Cervantes’s project in his novel is a proto-Nietzschean one. He
deconstructs his world’s understanding of ‘truth’ by blurring and
eventually erasing the line between history (fact) and art (lie),22
beginning with his reference to his book as ‘this true history’.23
Apparently, Miguel de Cervantes came to understand that politically
conservative forces not only controlled the content of art but of
‘history’ (i.e. the telling of the past), making certain that published
accounts of the past all confirmed Spain’s divinely ordained superior
status in the world and the divine right of Spanish monarchs. The
blatant censorship of art came mainly from Rome and took place in
broad daylight, while the Spanish control of ‘historical truth’ was
exercised off-stage in a realm of shadowed enticements and warnings.
Cervantes must have concluded that the result of this control of
historical discourse effaced the distinction between history and fiction.
Cervantes participates in revealing the results of this interference into
both art and history by alluding to certain embarrassing historical
frauds that had come to light in recent times.
Bruce Wardropper explains that the Spanish reading public was
responsive to Cervantes’s effort. It had already been jaded by recent
literary frauds that had nearly succeeded. First, there were the so-called
‘Leaden Books’, purportedly discovered in the Sacro Monte [Holy
Mountain] of Granada. Before these apparently ancient metallic plates
proved to be a ‘gross forgery’,24 they seemed to prove the truth of the
Spanish Church’s favourite dogma of the Immaculate Conception, and
established that St. James—Santiago, the patron saint of Spain—had
indeed come to the Iberian Peninsula during his lifetime. These books
were accepted as authentic by Kings Philip II, Philip III, and Philip IV,
before the revelation of their fraudulent status. Wardropper adds one
more dramatic case of literary hoax: the falsos cronicones, circulating at
the end of the sixteenth century, justifying questionable sainthoods,
bestowing nobility on families whose escutcheons were doubtful, and
lauding non-existent Christian military victories.25
Cervantes responded to this realization not by expressing reformist
views in his art or by correcting fallacious history, but by finding an
ingenious way to attack both art and history, showing how they had
become the same (in Spanish, of course, historia means both ‘history’
and ‘story’), and demonstrating how easily both were manipulated by
power. He could only do this in a consciously paradoxical manner,
using the authority of arte and historia to undermine that very
authority. If knowledge, history, and art are manipulated by political
power, Cervantes will not mock the powerful; he will appear to mock
knowledge, history, and art. Possibly his attack is at least as much
motivated by genuine philosophical doubt26 as by a political agenda,
but in either case, it would have political consequences that would be
punished if they were understood by the authorities.
It is unclear how many readers in his own age thought of Cervantes’s
book in this way, as they probably thought of it mostly as a very funny
story. In our age, Cervantes’s work can be read as a kind of
deconstruction of the ideas of art, history, and truth in the name of a
politico-philosophical point. It is this feature of the novel that makes
this, the first modern novel, an anticipation of post-modernist
philosophy. This deconstruction is exhibited prominently in the very
first line of the book as the problem of the unreliability of the book’s
narrative strategies: ‘Somewhere in La Mancha, in a place whose name
I do not care to remember, a gentleman lived not long ago…’.27 This
narrator begins his history by challenging us in a somewhat insulting
manner as if to show us from the first moment who is in charge here.
Although there are similarities in our descriptions of Cervantes’s
symptoms of modernity (and sometimes of postmodernity), Cascardi
has a slightly different diagnosis of Cervantes’s ‘illness’. He does not
treat these ‘symptoms’ as a narrative strategy with a philosophical goal,
as I do; rather, he seems to detect in Cervantes a disenchantment (pun
intended) based on his realization that the power and authority of the
past are no longer a trustworthy guide toward the future; yet, when
confronting that past, our poetic imagination fails and is overwhelmed
by that same power and authority. According to Cascardi, during
Spain’s Golden Age ‘poetry is supposed to have the power to transform
occasions of conflict and loss into experiences of an inestimable, if
painful, beauty. Its efficacy is reputed to be nearly miraculous’, yet
Cervantes raises a doubt ‘whether poetry can serve a redemptive
function in the…secular world’. Cascardi holds that it is this scepticism
that makes Cervantes modern, and it allows him to ‘create a new form
by questioning the motives of all those who would inherit the past’.28
In addition, I have argued that Cervantes’s novel pushes even
beyond modernism. We saw above that Foucault admired Don Quixote
for his philosophical insight into the epistemes of the Middle Ages.
Foucault is thought of as a poststructuralist, hence, by association, as a
philosopher of postmodernism. I have suggested that Cervantes’s novel
anticipated certain philosophical themes of postmodernity. It is not
only Foucault’s admiration that takes us to the borders of that new
land, nor the intentionally unreliable narrators of this story, nor the
mysteriously sliding signifiers designating proper names, but also the
intentional manipulation of chronology throughout the novel.29
Don Quixote and the Philosophy of the
Baroque
Philosophically, let us move backwards from postmodernity to
Cervantes’s own century. A major problem in the philosophy of the
1600s is the question of self-identity, resolved with Baroque pessimism
in the theories of Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679), who depicts human
nature as thoroughly selfish (‘Of the voluntary acts of every man, the
object is some good to himself’30), power-mongering (‘a general
inclination of all mankind, a perpetual and restless striving of power
after power, that ceaseth only in death’31), and taking pleasure in the
misery and pain of others (violence is motivated by people’s desire for
self-preservation, ‘and sometimes their delectation only’ (i.e. for the fun
of it)32). If I have philosophical understanding, I realize that this is who
I am, and that therefore my natural relation to others is as their enemy
in a state of war (‘and such a war, as is of every man, against every
man’33). Who am I? I am the one who hates his neighbour, and who is
the object of his neighbour’s hate. All of this, of course, is who I am in
the ‘state of nature’. Self-identity in the Commonwealth is more
negotiable, but always in fear and intimidation.
At about the same time, René Descartes moved the core of self-
identity not onto desire, as does Hobbes, but to consciousness, with his
discovery of the only thoroughly self-evident philosophical truth: ‘I
think, therefore I am’, first announced dramatically in 1637 in his
Discourse on Method.34 In Descartes’s Meditations, following four years
later, we see the same ideas, now swaddled in the Baroque wrappings
of his philosophy. José Antonio Maravall, in his Culture of the Baroque,
defines the Baroque period roughly as the years between 1600 and
1680. He characterizes the Baroque with adjectives such as ‘irrational,
irreal, 
fantastic, 
complicated, 
obscure, 
gesticulating, 
unrestrained,
exuberant, frenetic, transitive, and changing’. He contrasts these qualities
with those of the Renaissance: ‘logical, restrained, real, clear, serene, and
calm’.35 Descartes would certainly be offended by being called
irrational, but we easily recognize the other adjectives as applicable to
his Meditations, just as they are applicable to Leviathan and to Don
Quixote. Maravall adds one more characteristic: ‘There is scarcely a
Baroque work of high quality—from Bernini’s Santa Teresa to Poussin’s
Pastoral, to Calderón’s La vida es sueño—that escapes being touched by
kitsch’.36
In Descartes’s search for the foundations of knowledge, his Baroque
imagination runs wild. He decides to assume that our five senses
always deceive us, that it is impossible to distinguish the waking state
from the dream state, and declares that dreams are madder than
madness, and therefore imagines the possibility that we are all mad,
and because he believes that we dream all night, he declares that even
if we are sane, we enter into a state of temporary madness each night,
and that therefore we all spend about a third of our lives in a state of
insanity.37 Then he imagines that the world he inhabits was not created
by the God of Christianity but by an ‘Evil Genius’38 who causes every
one of his thoughts, beliefs, and perceptions to be false, and Descartes
entertains the possibility that he and the Evil Genius are the only
beings in this world.
The ‘second author’ of Don Quixote (the anonymous entrepreneur
who discovers the original manuscript written by Cide Hamete
Benengeli and has it translated from the Arabic into Castilian) informs
us that the decision of Alonso Quijano ‘to become a knight errant and
travel the world with his armour and his horse to seek adventures…
righting all manners of wrongs and…placing himself in danger and…
winning eternal renown and everlasting fame’ was ‘the strangest
thought any lunatic in the world ever had’.39 This claim may have been
true when the ‘second author’ penned it, but this mad thought was
surpassed by Descartes’s hypothesis, which is surely the most paranoid
thought that has ever invaded a human mind. Yet Descartes’s concern
about the effect of the Evil Genius on his own mental state is similar to
Don Quixote’s fear that he is pursued by an evil magician, Frestón, who
transforms his perceptions, interferes with his beliefs, and turns all
victories into defeats (not to mention that he turns Dulcinea, the fairest,
purest, most desirable woman in history into a dirty, ugly peasant girl
who smells of garlic).
I will not claim that Descartes borrowed his paranoia from
Cervantes’s novel, even though Descartes surely had read the
adventures of our knight. (A French translation first appeared in 1615
and immediately became popular. Other works of Cervantes,
particularly the Novelas ejemplares, were translated soon after.) Indeed,
if we look at one of Descartes’s characterization of madmen (‘persons
devoid of sense, whose cerebella are so troubled and clouded by the
violent vapours of black bile, that they…imagine that they…are made
of glass’40), we might suspect that Descartes had indeed borrowed from
Cervantes, who had published as one of his Novelas ejemplares a story
called El licenciado Vidriera, in which a philosophy student at the
University of Salamanca goes mad because of a failed romance, and
avoids the halls of the university, fearing that he is made of glass, and
if he is jostled by other students, he will shatter.
If the Evil Genius hypothesis is true (a possibility that Descartes’s
method of radical doubt requires him to consider), then Descartes must
suppose ‘that the heavens, the earth, colours, figures, sounds, and all
other external things are nought but the illusions and dreams of which
this genius has availed himself in order to lay traps for my credulity’.
He writes: ‘I shall consider myself as having no hands, no eyes, no
flesh, no blood, nor any senses, yet falsely believing myself to possess
all these things.’41 What is left for Descartes in the wake of this Baroque
masterpiece (and its touch of kitsch)? He asks, ‘I myself, am I not at
least something?’ He arrives at the ‘definite conclusion’ that the
proposition ‘I am, I exist, is necessarily true each time that I pronounce
it, or that I mentally conceive it’. ‘I know that I am’. He continues, ‘But
what am I?’ and he concludes, ‘I am not more than a thing which
thinks, that is to say, a mind or a soul, or an understanding, or a
reason…I am a real thing and really exist; but what thing? I have
answered: a thing which thinks [res cogitans]’.42
From this it follows that nothing physical is essential to selfhood; I
am my consciousness, mon ésprit (my mind). It is this proposition that
allows Descartes to hope for an eternal life; this is a religious hope that
cannot be proved true philosophically. His philosophical problem is to
solve the mind/body problem that he has created, and to escape the
solipsism into which he has cornered himself. It is almost universally
held that he fails on both accounts.
Personal Identity as Goffmanian
Performance
I do not know if Cervantes personally developed a theory of selfhood,
but we can deduce from Don Quixote’s words and acts that, as
Cervantes’s creation, Quixote does entertain such a theory, one that is
not encumbered with Descartes’s solipsism and his mind/body problem.
The theory that we can attribute to Quixote is much more modern than
Descartes’s, and, I would say, more plausible. We catch first sight of it
with the episode early in the novel in which Alonso Quijano’s
neighbour, Pedro Alonso, finds señor Quijano (only recently having
become Don Quixote de la Mancha) in a gulley, beaten, bruised, and
bloodied by some angry mule drivers with whom he has picked a fight.
A groggy Quixote mistakes this neighbour first for the Marquis of
Mantua—hero of a popular ballad—and then for the legendary knight
Rodrigo de Narváez. At that moment, Quixote tells his neighbour that
he himself is Valdevinos, nephew of that same Marquis of Mantua, and
then that he is the Moor, Abindarráez, governor of Antequera. These
confused claims, products of his battered brain, startle his neighbour,
who thinks señor Quijano has gone mad. The injured knight angrily
rebukes his worried neighbour, assuring him that he, Don Quixote, is
cognizant of his personal identity: ‘¡Yo sé quién soy!’ [‘I know who I
am!’],43 an assertion almost Cartesian in its certainty, and one that
ought to resolve the problem once and for all. Yet he continues his
asseveration, saying, ‘and I know I can be not only those that I have
mentioned [Valdevinos and Abindarráez] but the Twelve Peers of
France as well and the nine paragons of Fame’.
Therefore, when Don Quixote claims to know who he is, what he
knows about his identity is that he is the person who could play the
role of virtually anybody—from which we could deduce from Quixote’s
thought the view that the self is a theatrical illusion—and Quixote
thereby stakes out a radical position in the Baroque philosophical
debate concerning the nature of personal identity. In doing so, he
anticipates the theories of the twentieth-century sociologist Erving
Goffman (1922–82).44 I am not asserting here simply that it is possible
to study Don Quixote from a Goffmanian perspective (if Goffman’s
theory is true, then all social activity could be studied using his
schemas) but rather that the thoughts and actions of Don Quixote de la
Mancha anticipate Goffman’s theory. Now, because Cervantes’s novel
employs parody and satire, when one says that the novel expresses or
anticipates a certain philosophy (and I do treat Goffman here more as a
philosopher than as a scientist, that is, as someone who offers us a new
way of seeing the world and human behaviour), it is always possible
that the ‘expression’ or the ‘anticipation’ is really Cervantes’s idea of a
joke. That’s the problem for any critic trying to discuss serious
philosophical themes in Don Quixote.
Nevertheless, I would argue that, in addition to Cervantes, another
Baroque artist, Diego Velázquez, in Las Meninas, also anticipates
Goffman, and in ways that are not in jest. Peering at that painting, at
one moment we are looking at the scene depicted as if we were King
Philip IV of Spain or Queen Mariana of Austria; our presence has
attracted the attention of the five-year old Infanta Margarita Teresa, of
the hydrocephalous dwarf, Mari Bárbola, of the lady in waiting, Doña
Isabel de Velasco, that of José Nieto, Velázquez’s cousin, and of Diego
Velázquez himself. Gazing at these individuals as we do from the
perspective of the king and queen, we have assumed their royal roles.
But at the next moment we realize that we are looking at the scene
from the perspective of the painter; we see what he would see if he
were us. We have assumed the role of Velázquez himself; however, we
see him in his role as royal artist looking at us. In this painting there is
an entire system of fractured identities, for a moment, certainties (as in
Descartes), but suddenly evanescing, lost, and then recovered,
stabilized only when we tear our eyes from the painting. (By moving
back and forth between the roles of the king and queen of Spain and
one of the greatest artists in history, are we being any less
presumptuous than Don Quixote when he says he could play the roles
of the Twelve Peers of France?). By painting the red cross of the Order
of Saint James on the image of himself on the canvas, was not Don
Diego knighting himself, much as Don Quixote did to himself?
The application to Don Quixote of Erving Goffman’s theory of
performativity may seem anachronistic, but it also seems quite natural.
Don Quixote himself might approve of it.45 If Goffman was the first
scientist to assert that selfhood is performance, Don Quixote was the
first who tried to prove it. A Baroque performance produces Baroque
selves. What is important, Goffman would later write, is that the
performance be credible to its audience. A credible performance creates
social reality. Cervantes mocks Baroque social reality by representing
it. In such a world, true parody is impossible:
A correctly staged and performed scene leads the audience to impute a
self to a performed character, but this imputation—this self—is a
product of a scene that comes off, and is not a cause of it. The self, then,
as a performed character, is not an organic thing that has a specific
location, whose fundamental fate is to be born, to mature, and to die; it
is a dramatic effect arising diffusely from a scene that is presented, and
the characteristic issue, the crucial concern, is whether it will be
credited or discredited.46
Goffman, then, studies the self as ‘dramatic effect’—the ‘product of a
scene that comes off’. He does not deny that there is such a thing as a
self behind the performed self, but there is little that is sociologically
useful in the characterization of that self. The self-behind-the
performed-self he calls ‘our all-too-human-self’, and, in the guise of that
self, we are ‘creatures of variable impulse with moods and energies that
change from one moment to the next’.47 Sociality, however, cannot
function without certain agreed-upon consistencies that overcome the
‘ups and downs’ of emotional and impulsive life; staged performances
bridge these gaps, because sociality is ‘the show that must go on’.48
Applying Goffmanian theory to Cervantes’s novel leaves us with the
conclusion that neither Alonso Quijano nor Don Quixote, in terms of
their ‘all-too-human selves’—that is, as the self behind the performing
self—is the ‘real’ character in the novel; rather, both Quijano and
Quixote are ‘the product of a scene that comes off’. The implication is
that the only selves in this novel are those that are the product of the
roles they have been assigned, but what makes Quixote sociologically
interesting is that, unlike most of us, he plays roles he assigns to
himself. It is historically clear that the roles assigned to the petty
aristocracy in the early Baroque period were quickly becoming
antiquated, and in many cases, both politically and economically
bankrupt. Cervantes’s character señor Alonso Quijano earned enough
from his small holdings to maintain a simple country lifestyle. Probably
the only way to recover the now-lost economic standing of his forbears
would have been an advantageous marriage to the daughter of a
wealthy hidalgo (which were few and far between on the plains of La
Mancha) or a wealthy peasant with large agricultural holdings. For
whatever reason, señor Quijano remained a bachelor, sinking into what
must have been a rather tedious daily routine over a period of many
years. His options were to slip into boredom and historical redundancy,
or to break dramatically out of the mould. According to Goffman, ‘the
object of a performer is to sustain a particular definition of the
situation, this representing, as it were, his claim as to what reality is’.49
For a long time, Alonso Quijano did so only in a half-hearted manner,
allowing his name and family history to sustain a definition of the
social situation in which he and his kind would remain in the
privileged condition that his forbears had occupied, mostly in an
unself-conscious way.
When we turn to the character that Quijano becomes—Don Quixote
of La Mancha—Goffmanian theory becomes more interesting, because
the new knight-errant’s task is precisely and consciously that of
imposing his definition of the situation on an unwilling audience, and
to do so in order to convert individuals—indeed, a whole nation—to
accept his definition of reality (or the definition of reality set forth by
Amadís of Gaul50), and to develop performances that will achieve that
end. The performances engaged in by Don Quixote presuppose a
different social reality than the one assumed by his audience/fellow
actors; even a different metaphysical reality is assumed, involving, as it
does, magical powers of enchantment, demons, flying horses, and evil
dwarves and giants. This is a ‘separate reality’ from the one that
Quixote’s audiences believe they inhabit. Yet Don Quixote does not and
cannot remain alone in a solipsistic world; he meets the world of his
sceptics and opponents head-on, often with his lance lowered.
Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889–1951) argued against the possibility of
private languages, which would be a language spoken and understood
only by the single individual. According to Wittgenstein, all languages
are rule-bound, and it is logically impossible to obey a rule by oneself,
because then one would never know for certain whether one has
obeyed or broken a rule (‘to think one is obeying a rule is not to obey a
rule. Hence it is not possible to obey a rule privately: otherwise
thinking one was obeying a rule would be the same thing as obeying
it’51). The rules of a language game generate the meaning of the words
in the game, just as the rules of chess determine the meaning of the
chess pieces, and the use to which they can be put, that is, they
determine the work that the words/chess pieces can perform (‘the
meaning of a word is its use in the language’52); ‘The question, “What is
a word really?” is analogous to “What is a piece in chess?”’. When the
rules of a language-game are broken, ‘language goes on holiday’;53 in
that case, ‘language is like an engine idling, not…doing work’.54 This is
how nonsense is produced. Therefore, Quixote must find other players
to play his language games and to be his audience/fellow performers.
The alternative is to inhabit a solipsistic world of nonsense (i.e. a world
of madness)—such as the one into which Cervantes’s Baroque
counterpart, René Descartes, almost fell.
Don Quixote and Jean-Paul Sartre
Apparently there is a feature of the life of Don Quixote that is not easily
accounted for in Goffman’s theory of the self as dramatic effect, and
that is precisely the conversion of hidalgo Quijano into the glorious
Knight of the Lions (or the abandonment of one set of dramatic effects
for another yet more dramatic one), and the intensity in which these
new performances are conducted. The explanation of those features
will require either a specific theory of madness or a theory of
existential self-creation.
We can say that Cervantes’s characterization of Don Alonso’s
conversion from bored petty nobleman in a sleepy village into a
courageous knight errant anticipates the Sartrean view that there are
certain ‘original projects’55 that each of us chooses, and in doing so, we
create not only ourselves but a world for ourselves to inhabit. If we
normally feel that these projects and that world are not our own
choices but were chosen for us by others or by anonymous forces—by
family, religion, ethnicity, social class, geography, or by Freudian-like
episodes in our early childhood—then, according to Sartre, we are
engaging in a form of denial or ‘bad faith’.56 Sartre calls the decision to
break with an old original project and choose a new one a ‘radical
conversion’.57 When Quixote says, ‘cada uno es el artifice de su ventura’
[‘each man is the architect of his own fortune’]58 he is rejecting the
determinism that seems to drive the Goffmanian project. But, someone
might ask, is not the selfhood that Quixote ‘chooses’ really only the
product of madness? One of the most astonishing moments in the novel
is when Quixote explains to Sancho that the roles he has assumed as
knight errant require that he choose to go mad. Even though we
normally think that madness is something that befalls one, not
something that one chooses, Freud himself admits the existential
possibility of such a choice:
As a last technique of living, which will at least bring him substitutive
satisfactions, he is offered that of a flight into neurotic illness—a flight
which he usually accomplishes when he is still young. The man who
sees his pursuit of happiness come to nothing in later years can still find
consolation in the yield of pleasure of chronic intoxication; or he can
embark on the desperate attempt at rebellion seen in a psychosis.59
Indeed, in The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life, Goffman on
numerous occasions quotes approvingly two philosophers of freedom,
Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir, in order to support his
dramaturgical theory of social reality. This shows that Goffman is open
to 
a 
non-deterministic 
interpretation 
of 
his 
own 
theory 
of
performativity. According to Sartre, each individuals reassert the
primacy of their ‘original project’ in every act that they undertake
thereafter until they no longer do, until they undergo a new radical
conversion—choosing a new life project—or until they die. According
to Sartre, such a ‘transformation of my being-in-the-world’ is possible at
every moment: ‘I could have done otherwise. Agreed. But at what
price?’60 At what price, indeed? It cost Alonso Quijano his sanity, and
perhaps his life. Yet many admirers of Don Quixote wish that he had
not suddenly chosen to abandon his inspired radical conversion at the
end of his life in order to return to the bosom of ‘normality’, that is, to
reassume the role of Alonso Quijano the Good. The kind of selfhood,
self-identity, and subjectivity that Cervantes deals with in this story is
more Goffmanian and Sartrean than Cartesian, and also approaches the
scary vision of Velázquez and Foucault,61 warning us of the unstable
and shifting grounds of self-identity. True, this is a Baroque conception
of self-identity, but, even so, it is an existential one.
Although Sartre coined the term existentialism, Søren Kierkegaard
(1813–55) is acknowledged as the founder of this philosophy. The
pseudonymous ‘author’ of Kierkegaard’s Either/Or urges his reader to
‘Choose thyself’.62 He explains, ‘in making the choice it is not so much
a question of choosing the right as of the energy, the earnestness, the
pathos with which one chooses. Thereby the personality announces its
inner infinity, and thereby, in turn, the personality is consolidated’.63 A
choice very much like this was made ‘somewhere in La Mancha,…not
long ago’.
Don Quixote, Miguel de Unamuno, and
Søren Kierkegaard
My last example of anticipations of future philosophies by Cervantes is
not based on a claim made by me, but on one asserted by the Basque
philosopher Miguel de Unamuno y Jugo (1864–1936). Unamuno is
considered to be an older member of what was called the Generation of
’98, a group of writers, poets, and artists who were in the intellectual
vanguard after the loss of the Spanish-American War in 1898. This
military disaster, and with it the loss of what remained of the old
Spanish Empire (e.g., Cuba, Puerto Rico, and the Philippines), forced an
anguished recognition of the need to challenge all of the old national
myths, and to reconsider all things Spanish. A more realistic
understanding of Spain’s place in the world was required, and less
construction of fantasy castles in the sky.
In June of 1898, Unamuno published an article called ‘¡Muera Don
Quijote!’ [‘Death to Don Quixote!’]. In that article he clamoured, ‘Let
Don Quixote die that Alonso Quixano the Good may be reborn! Let Don
Quixote die!’64 But by 1905, Unamuno had changed his tune
completely; Spain did not need less Quixotic madness but more of it.
Unamuno published his panegyric on the Knight of the Doleful
Countenance in 1905, titling it Vida de Don Quijote y Sancho [The Life of
Don Quixote and Sancho]. I am sure that a number of things happened
in Unamuno’s volatile mind to provoke that radical change of heart,
but certainly one of the most important was his discovery of
Kierkegaard in 1900. After Unamuno’s death, fourteen volumes by
Kierkegaard in Danish were found in Unamuno’s library, all with
copious marginalia. Among those books was Kierkegaard’s small
masterpiece, Fear and Trembling. It was, I suggest, Unamuno’s
confrontation with this book that made him rethink Don Quixote.65
The subject of Kierkegaard’s book is the Biblical Abraham, whom
Kierkegaard’s pseudonym, Johannes de Silentio, dubs ‘a Knight of
Faith’. The subject of Unamuno’s book, of course, is Don Quixote,
whom he also dubs ‘un Caballero de la Fe’ [‘a Knight of Faith’].
Johannes de Silentio’s task is to discover exactly what it is that made
Abraham a Knight of Faith, but he is unable to do so because he finds
the story of Abraham to be incomprehensible. The figure of Abraham
presents a paradox. Abraham waited seventy years of his life for the
son who, as God had promised, would become the seed of a great
nation. Finally, in her ninetieth year, Abraham’s wife Sarah was blessed
with the long-promised son. The child grew in stature and in moral
quality, and Abraham loved him. Then came that terrible night
described in Genesis 22:1–2:
And it came to pass…that God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him,
Abraham: and he said, Behold, here I am. And he said, Take now thy
son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land
of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering on one of the
mountains which I will tell thee of.
Abraham, without hesitation, telling no one, took Isaac, travelled with
him three days through that lonely desert, placed the boy on the
appointed altar, lifted the sacrificial knife, and was totally prepared to
make the fatal thrust when the Angel of the Lord stopped him, telling
him that he had passed the test, and allowing him to sacrifice a ram,
conveniently caught in some brambles, instead of his son.
Johannes de Silentio cannot understand how Abraham could have
done all this. ‘Who gave strength to Abraham’s arm? Who held his right
hand up so that it did not fall limp at his side? He who gazes at this
becomes paralyzed. Who gave strength to Abraham’s soul, so that his
eyes did not grow dim, so that he saw neither Isaac not the ram? He
who gazes at this becomes blind’.66
But it is not just Abraham’s resoluteness that is incomprehensible.
There is something more profound. When Abraham lifts his knife to
sacrifice Isaac he knows that in the next moment his child will be dead,
yet at the same time he absolutely believes God’s old promise; hence he
believes that he will get Isaac back. He has this impossible hope ‘by
virtue of the absurd’.67 Kierkegaard wants his readers to ask themselves
what kind of mental condition one must be in to be capable of
Abraham’s absurd faith. The radical incongruity of Abraham’s beliefs
seems to indicate a state of what has sometimes been called
schizophrenia. This sobering thought, of course, is meant to provoke
the fear and trembling of the book’s title, and the fear and trembling
should become more acute to people who profess to be Christians,
Jews, or Muslims when it occurs to them that it was God himself who
demanded this of Abraham, and that Abraham is the father of us all.
Unamuno, reading in his newly acquired Danish, recognized
Kierkegaard as a ‘brother’. Unamauno may have realized that
Kierkegaard was revealing to ‘Christendom’ that what was demanded of
Christ was a radical form of differentness that was in truth a form of
madness: ‘divine madness’,68 but madness nevertheless. The Dane knew
that this message would be too much for most of them to bear.
How does Cervantes himself relate to this Kierkegaardian project? It
is possible—but unlikely, in my opinion—that the real target of
Cervantes’s barbs was Spanish Roman Catholicism. According to this
hypothesis, in mocking the enchantments, magic, superstitions,
miracles, curses, and punishments to which Don Quixote agrees to
submit, Cervantes was actually mocking the madness of the form of
Baroque Christianity to which his fellow Spaniards had dedicated
themselves. The desert of La Mancha is not the desert of Galilee, but
there are enchantments, curses, and miracles galore in both venues.
Think of Jesus’s cursing the fig tree that did not provide him with a
fruit:
[F]or the time of figs was not yet. And Jesus answered and said unto it,
No man eat fruit of thee hereafter forever…And in the morning as they
passed by, they saw the fig tree dried up from the roots. And Peter saith
unto him, Master, behold, the fig tree which thou cursedst is withered
away. And Jesus answering saith unto them, Have faith in God.69
Jesus of Nazareth not only cast a spell on a fig tree, killing it for not
producing a fig out of season, but he also cured leprosy by the touch of
his hands and he extracted demons from a madman and cast them into
a herd of swine, all of which ran off a cliff into the sea and drowned; he
raised the dead. He changed water into wine, and he turned a basket of
fish and loaves into a meal for hundreds of listeners. He, his Father,
and the Holy Spirit intercede in the lives of human beings, rewarding
friends with eternal happiness and punishing with eternal fires those
who declare themselves to be enemies. According to this line of
thought, Don Quixote is no more mad than his readers, who are still
mesmerized by medieval enchantments. Like Don Quixote, they were
neo-medievalists despite themselves, dazzled in broad daylight by
ancient dreams.
Kierkegaard did not call himself a Christian; he wrote that he was
trying to become a Christian. To achieve that difficult status one would
have to understand and even aspire to Abraham’s greatness: ‘Abraham
was greater than all, great by reason of his power whose strength is
impotence, great by reason of his wisdom whose secret is foolishness,
great by reason of his hope whose form is madness’.70 It is this absurd
‘hope whose form is madness’ that intrigued Unamuno. It was that
‘faith in the absurd’71 that motivated Quixote and made him great.
‘Only the man who attempts the absurd is capable of conquering the
impossible.’72 In The Life of Don Quixote and Sancho, Unamuno
apologizes to Don Quixote for his article of a few years earlier, ‘Death
to Don Quixote!’, and he begs of him, ‘Touch me with your madness,
my Don Quixote, touch me to the quick’.73
Not everyone can withstand such a strong dose of religiosity; most
people prefer a diluted version, what Kierkegaard calls ‘lemonade
twaddle’.74 Kierkegaard had plumbed to the depths the question, what
would it be like to commit absolutely to the absolute—to commit to
obedience to an absolute authority that demands total submission to
demands that come from so high that they are unintelligible? Unamuno
has understood Kierkegaard’s message. Referring to the Dane, he says
in his The Tragic Sense of Life, ‘No wonder that a man entitled to make
the statement spoke of the madness of the Cross. Madness, without a
doubt, madness’.75
Humour and Philosophy
In Shakespeare’s As You Like It, the shepherd Touchstone, upon meeting
another shepherd, Corin, asks him, ‘Hast any philosophy in thee,
shepherd?’76 This is a question that Quixote poses indirectly to several
shepherds and goatherds in the novel of which he is the hero. I have
tried to show here that if this question were posed to Don Quixote it
would receive a resoundingly affirmative answer. And this is as it
should be. In Cervantes’s Prologue to his novel, he reports to his ‘idle
reader’ a conversation he has had with a friend to whom he had
apologized for failing to imitate other authors whose fictions ‘are so full
of citations from Aristotle, Plato, and the entire horde of philosophers
that readers are moved to admire…My book will lack all of this’.77 In
fact, this is ironic humour of the type that fills the whole book.
Cervantes knew very well that Aristotle had asserted that ‘poetry is
more akin to philosophy and is a better thing than history’,78 and he
had set out to prove that philosophical proposition, even while
undermining poetry’s authority.79 His ‘historia’ (story) is philosophically
superior to ‘historia’ (history), but this truth is realized only after the
dusky flight of the owl of Minerva. The difference between Hegel’s owl
and Cervantes’s is that the latter had a grin on its face—the grin of the
Cheshire Cat.
Similarly, Cervantes certainly intended to write a book that was
humorous, and he succeeded. ‘It is said that the king, when he saw a
student laughing boisterously, declared…“That student is either out of
his mind or he is reading the story of Don Quixote”’.80 Cervantes’s
irony is still funny to us. His prologue addressed to his readers is full of
humorous irony. He regrets that his manuscript is ‘a tale as dry as
esparto grass, devoid of invention, deficient in style, poor in ideas and
lacking in all erudition and doctrine’. He admits that he has not quoted
any ‘Holy Scripture’ nor preached any ‘Christian sermon’, and he
deplores his ‘incompetence and lack of learning’.81 He bemoans the fact
that he has no lofty passages in Latin, and that no elevated men of
letters have written sonnets for him that he could reproduce in his
introduction. As we saw, he despairs of the ability to include quotations
and theories of great philosophers, placed alphabetically, from Aristotle
to Xenophon, despite the fact that his novel bristles with philosophical
insight, as I have tried to show.
Cervantes’s plot is funny: a man goes crazy reading novels and
comes to believe he is the hero of these novels; he acts out his heroic
role in a madly noble manner but gets in lots of trouble doing so; he is
laughed at and mocked by all, but nevertheless engages in foolish but
nobly inspired activity; on his deathbed he comes to his senses and
denounces his former madness. It is this plot that accounts for most of
the humour in the novel and for its general entertainment value. Much
was said above about the philosophy and social criticism in Cervantes’s
novel; this does not mean that Cervantes’s masterpiece is not a satire of
chivalric literature. Such satire certainly exists in the novel, but that
attack is really only an aspect of a much larger project. Cervantes’s art
is ‘politics by other means’, as Von Clausowitz said about war. All
attacks must have a medium, and Cervantes’s medium is humour.
Nevertheless, Don Quixote is not as funny to us as it was to Cervantes’s
contemporaries—both because it contains certain ‘in-jokes’ that most
lay readers today would not understand, or, if we did understand them,
would find them less funny now because they are less immediate—and
because in the late Renaissance and early Baroque period it was
expected that people would take great pleasure at the expense of the
displeasure of others.82 When the shepherds stone Don Quixote,
bruising him and breaking a tooth, readers found his pain highly
amusing. It was jolly to mock the mad, or anyone who was different.
Recall that Velázquez placed two jesters in Las Meninas—a
hydrocephalous dwarf and a midget—whose function in the Baroque
world was to be laughed at, as it was with madmen, such as Alonso
Quijano, a.k.a. Don Quixote. It is for this reason that Vladimir Nabokov
judges the novel to be ‘a cruel and crude old book’.83 Few people today
would admit to finding other people’s pain funny. Jokes today are still
usually at someone’s expense, and sometimes at the expense of those
who are different; often it is at the expense of the powerful. Cervantes’s
words are subversive because humour and the carnivalesque always
have had subversive potential, as Mikhail Bakhtin insists, and because
writing a work of fiction is an act of hubris, the author assigns to
himself or herself the godly role of creator. And, on the seventh day,
‘God saw everything that he had made, and, behold, it was good’.
Works Cited
Aristotle. On Poetry. In On Poetry and Style, translated by G. M. A. Grube (New
York: The Liberal Arts Press, 1958).
Butler, Joseph. Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel [1729] (Boston:
Hilliard, Gray, Little, and Wilkins, 1827).
Canavaggio, Jean. Cervantes, translated by J. R. Jones (New York & London: W.
W. Norton & Co, 1990).
Cascardi, Anthony J. ‘Cervantes and Descartes on the Dream Argument’.
Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 4, no. 2 (1984): pp. 109–
22.
Cascardi, Anthony J. Cervantes, Literature, and the Discourse of Politics (Madrid:
Vervuert, 2006).
Cascardi, Anthony J. Ideologies of History in the Spanish Golden Age (University
Park, PA: The Pennsylvania State University Press, 1997).
Cascardi, Anthony J. The Bounds of Reason: Cervantes, Dostoyevsky, Flaubert
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1986).
Cascardi, Anthony J. ‘Two Kinds of Knowing in Plato, Cervantes, and Aristotle’,
Philosophy and Literature 24, no. 2 (2000): pp. 406–23.
Cervantes, Miguel de. Don Quixote, translated by Edith Grossman (New York:
Harper Collins, 2003).
Cervantes, Miguel de. El ingenioso hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha (Madrid:
Espasa-Calpe, 1959).
Descartes, René. Discourse on Method and Meditations on First Philosophy. In The
Essential Descartes, translated by Elizabeth S. Haldane and G. R. T. Ross (New
York: Signet, 1969).
Foucault, Michel. The Order of Things: An Archaelogy of the Human Sciences (New
York: Random House/Vintage Books, 1973).
Freud, Sigmund. Civilization and its Discontents, translated by James Strachey
(New York and London: Norton, 1989).
Girard, René. Deceit, Desire, and the Novel: Self and Other in Literary Structure,
translated by Yvonne Freccero (Baltimore, The Johns Hopkins Press, 1965).
Goffman, Erving. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life (New York, London,
Toronto: Doubleday Anchor, 1959).
Gorfkle, Laura J. Discovering the Comic in ‘Don Quixote’ (Chapel Hill, North
Carolina Studies in the Romance Languages and Literatures, 1993).
Hauser, Arnold. The Philosophy of Art History (New York: Alfred A. Knopf,
1959).
Hegel, G. W. F. The Philosophy of Right. In Hegel: The Essential Writings, edited by
Frederick G. Weiss (New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1974).
Hobbes, Thomas. Leviathan: Or the Matter, Forme and Power of a Comonwealth
Ecclesiasticall and Civil (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1998).
Kierkegaard, Søren. Attack upon ‘Christendom’, translated by Walter Lowrie.
(Boston: Beacon Press, 1959).
Kierkegaard, Søren. Either/Or, vol. 2, translated by David F. Swenson and Lillian
Marvin Swenson (Garden City, NY: Doubleday Anchor Books, 1959).
Kierkegaard, Søren. Fear and Trembling, translated by Walter Lowrie (Garden
City, NY: Doubleday Anchor Books, 1954).
Lorca, Daniel. ‘The Function of Skepticism in Part I of Don Quijote’. Cervantes:
Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 30, no. 2 (2010): pp. 115–48.
Lugo Acevedo, María Luisa. ‘¡Yo sé quién soy!: Acerca de cómo Don Quijote
construye su identidad a través del nombre’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the
Cervantes Society of America 33, no. 2 (2013): 173–92.
Malfatti, Sarah. ‘El deseo de ser sí mismo: Don Quijote y la mímesis girardiana’.
Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 33, no. 2 (2013): 193–
215.
Maravall, José Antonio. Culture of the Baroque: Analysis of a Historical Structure,
translated by Terry Cochran (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
1986).
Maravall, José Antonio. Utopia and Counterutopia in the ‘Quixote’, translated by
Robert W. Felkel (Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1991).
Martín, Adrienne L. ‘Humour and Violence in Cervantes’. In The Cambridge
Companion to Cervantes, edited by Anthony J. Cascardi (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2002), pp. 160–85.
May, Leila S. Secrecy and Disclosure in Victorian Fiction (London & New York:
Routledge, 2017).
Nabokov, Vladimir. Lectures on Don Quixote (San Diego: Harcourt, Brace,
Jovanovich, 1984).
Nietzsche, Friedrich. Beyond Good and Evil, translated by Walter Kaufmann
(New York: Random House, 1966).
Nietzsche, Friedrich. The Birth of Tragedy, translated by Clifton F. Fadiman (New
York: Dover Publications, 1995).
Palmer, Donald D. ‘Don Quixote and the Remembrance of Things Medieval’.
Postmedieval: A Journal of Medieval Cultural Studies 5, no. 1 (2014): pp. 10–20.
Palmer, Donald D. ‘Unamuno, Freud, and the Case of Alonso Quijano’. Hispania
54, no. 2 (1971): pp. 243–9.
Palmer, Donald D. ‘Unamuno’s Don Quijote and Kierkegaard’s Abraham’. Revista
de estudios hispánicos 3, no. 2 (1969): pp. 1–18.
Plato. The Republic. In Great Dialogues of Plato, translated by W. H. D. Rouse
(New York and Scarborough, Ontario: New American Library, 1956).
Sartre, Jean-Paul. Being and Nothingness: A Phenomenological Essay on Ontology,
translated by Hazel E. Barnes (New York: Washington Square Press, 1992).
Shakespeare, William. As You Like It. In The Riverside Shakespeare (Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 1997).
Ticknor, George. History of Spanish Literature, 4th ed. (Boston: Houghton,
Osgood and Company, 1879).
Unamuno, Miguel de. ‘¡Muera Don Quixote!’. In Miguel de Unamuno: Obras
Completas, vol. VII (New York: Las Americas Publishing Co., 1967), pp. 1194–
6.
Unamuno, Miguel de. The Life of Don Quixote and Sancho, translated by Anthony
Kerrigan (Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University Press, 1967).
Unamuno, Miguel de. The Tragic Sense of Life, translated by Anthony Kerrigan
(Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University Press, 1972).
Unamuno, Miguel de. Vida de Don Quijote y Sancho (Madrid: Espasa-Calpe,
1958).
Wardropper, Bruce W. ‘Don Quixote: Story or History?’. In Cervantes’s ‘Don
Quixote’: A Casebook, edited by Roberto González Echevarría (Oxford & New
York: Oxford University Press, 2005), pp. 141–61.
Williamson, Edwin. ‘“Intención” and “invención” in the Quixote’. Cervantes:
Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 7, no. 2 (1988): pp. 7–22.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. Philosophical Investigations, translated by G. E. M.
Anscombe (New York: Macmillan, 1964).
1 On the other hand, for a defense of reading Don Quixote essentially as a
comic work, as it was received in the seventeenth century when it was
published, see Gorfkle.
2 Cascardi addresses Cervantes’s political ideas and his method of presenting
them in an environment that threatened censorship and punishment to
nonconformists (Cervantes, Literature,…). As will be seen below, Cascardi is also
the foremost contributor to the discussion of the role of philosophy in
Cervantes’s writings.
3 Cervantes, Don Quixote, I.11, p. 77.
4 Hegel, p. 256.
5 For my account of the kinds of misunderstandings that medieval culture
makes about itself, see Palmer, ‘Don Quixote…’, especially pp. 16–17.
6 Foucault, p. xxii.
7 Foucault, p. xv.
8 Butler, section 30, n.p.
9 Foucault, pp. 47–8.
10 I.38, p. 708.
11 Plato, p. 407, § 607B.
12 Cascardi, ‘Two Kinds…’, p. 407. Cascardi is right about this; the Spanish is
‘perjudiciales en la república’, almost certainly a reference to Plato’s Republic.
Translators Grossman (2003), Raffel (1999), and Cohen (1950) all miss this
hint, Grossman translating ‘república’ as ‘nation’, Raffel as ‘country’, and Cohen
as ‘commonwealth’.
13 Plato, pp. 118–422, §508E–511E.
14 Plato, Book IX, p. 370, § 571C.
15 Aristotle, p. 18, § 1451b.
16 Cascardi, ‘Two Kinds…, p. 407; Cervantes, Don Quixote, II.3, p. 476.
17 For an account of Cervantes’s intentional incorporation into his work of
Aristotle’s principles of tragic or epic action (‘intención’), and of the extent to
which Cervantes rejects Aristotles’s principles, replacing them with his own
(‘invención’), see Williamson.
18 Nietzsche, The Birth…, p. 17; original emphases.
19 Nietzsche, Beyond…, p. 3.
20 Hauser, p. 55.
21 Epimenides of Crete is supposed to have said that ‘all Cretans are liars’. If
this assertion is true, then it is false. If it is false, then it is true.
22 ‘By the sixteenth century, fiction, whether in poetry or prose, was
unequivocally called lying’ (Wardropper, p. 145).
23 Cervantes, Don Quixote, I.1, p. 23.
24 Ticknor, p. 215, n15. Quoted by Wardropper, p. 150.
25 Wardropper, pp. 150–1.
26 Daniel Lorca defends the view that Cervantes was directly influenced by
the school of Greek sceptics, and especially by Sextus Empiricus (second and
third century ce), who ‘rejects authority as a valid mechanism to obtain truth.
Argumentation and direct observation ought to be used instead’ (p. 116). Lorca
makes a strong case, but the scepticism of Don Quixote seems to me to be more
radical than that of Sextus Empiricus. Cervantes challenges not only authority
but argumentation and observation, and perhaps ‘truth’ itself.
27 Cervantes, Don Quixote, I.1, p. 19.
28 Cascardi, Ideologies…, pp. 233, 229, 245.
29 Examples of the historical incongruities: The events of the story happened
‘not long ago’ (I.1, p. 19). The story was ‘written in Gothic parchments’
hundreds of years before the date of publication of Part I (i.e. before 1605)
(I.52, p. 445). Sancho’s letter to his wife, dated ‘the twentieth of July, 1614’
(II.36, p. 699). The episode in the Cave of Montesinos: ‘more than five hundred
years have passed’ (II.23, p. 608).
30 Hobbes, p. 88.
31 Hobbes, p. 66.
32 Hobbes, p. 83.
33 Hobbes, p. 84.
34 Descartes, Discourse…, p. 127.
35 Maravall, Culture…, p. 207; original emphases.
36 Maravall, Culture…, p. 90.
37 Cascardi detects important similarities between elements of Cervantes’s
account of the dream problem and Descartes’s, but stresses differences between
them, concluding that Descartes makes a fundamental philosophical error that
Cervantes avoids (‘Cervantes and Descartes…, pp. 109–22).
38 Descartes, Meditations…, p. 169.
39 Cervantes, Don Quixote, I.1, p. 21.
40 Descartes, Meditations…, p. 166.
41 Descartes, Meditations…, pp. 169–70.
42 Descartes, Meditations…, p. 171, 173.
43 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.5, p. 36; Cervantes, Don Quixote, I.5, p.43.
44 For an alternative explanation of the significance of Quixote’s ‘I know who
I am!,’ see Lugo Acevedo, pp. 173–93. Rather than finding Goffman in
Cervantes, Lugo Acevedo claims to find philosophers Ludwig Wittgenstein, J.L.
Austin, and Judith Butler.
45 To this extent, I am in agreement with Cascardi’s account of selfhood in
Don Quixote: ‘his identity is a function of the models he imitates, the roles he
plays’ (The Bounds…, p. 68). He adds, ‘all the evidence of the novel suggests
that Don Quixote gains personal identity and value through the role, not the
“self”’’. However, Cascardi would shy away from my Goffmanian thesis, as he
has written, ‘for sociologists (e.g., Goffman), the role dissolves the self’ (p. 70). I
believe this is an inaccurate reading of Goffman. According to Goffman, the
performances of roles do not dissolve the self, they present the self, as we see in
the title of his book.
46 Goffman, pp. 252–3; original emphasis. In associating Cervantes’s
sociological theory with Goffman’s sociology, I am following the lead of Leila S.
May, who employs Goffmanian categories in her exploration of Victorian
secrecy and subjectivity.
47 Goffman, p. 56.
48 Goffman, p. 252.
49 Goffman, p. 72.
50 My reference here is to the late René Girard, who opens his book claiming
that Don Quixote is the paradigm case of what he calls ‘triangulated desire’, or
‘mediated desire’, or ‘imitated desire’. Girard says, ‘Don Quixote has
surrendered to Amadís the individual’s fundamental prerogative: he no longer
chooses the objects of his own desire—Amadís must choose for him’ (p. 1). For
an excellent presentation of Girard’s thesis and an adjustment to it, see Malfatti.
51 Wittgenstein, p. 81; original emphasis.
52 Wittgenstein, p. 20.
53 Wittgenstein, p. 19.
54 Wittgenstein, p. 51.
55 Sartre writes: ‘I am referred to…my original project; that is, to my being-
in-the-world in so far as this being is a choice’ (p. 589). Sartre also calls this
choice ‘an initial project’ (p. 588).
56 See Sartre, pp. 86–116, for a discussion on his concept of ‘bad faith’.
57 Sartre, p. 598.
58 Cervantes, Don Quijote, II.66, p. 675; Cervantes, Don Quixote, II.66, p. 893.
59 Freud, pp. 35–6; my emphasis. For other connections between Freud and
Cervantes, see Palmer, ‘Unamuno, Freud…, pp. 243–9.
60 Sartre, p. 585; original emphasis.
61 Consider the notorious final paragraph of The Order of Things: ‘…man is an
invention of a recent date. And one perhaps nearing its end.’ Foucault
continues, speculating on an eventual collapse of the epistemic conditions that
brought man about, ‘…then one can certainly wager that man would be erased,
like a face drawn in sand at the edge of the sea’ (p. 387).
62 Kierkegaard, Either/Or, v. 2, p. 226.
63 Kierkegaard, Either/Or, v. 2, p. 171.
64 Unamuno, ‘¡Muera Don Quixote!’, p. 1196.
65 The ideas in this section are developed more fully in Palmer, ‘Unamuno’s
Don Quijote…’.
66 Kierkegaard, Fear and Trembling, p. 36.
67 Kierkegaard, Fear and Trembling, p. 69.
68 Kierkegaard, Fear and Trembling, p. 3.
69 St. Mark 11:12–14, 20–2.
70 Kierkegaard, Fear and Trembling, p. 31.
71 Unamuno, Life of Don Quixote…, p. 112.
72 Unamuno, Life of Don Quixote…, p. 146.
73 Unamuno, Life of Don Quixote…, p. 280.
74 Kierkegaard, Attack upon ‘Christendom’, p. 277.
75 Unamuno, The Tragic…, p. 280.
76 Shakespeare, As You Like It, p. 383.
77 Cervantes, Don Quixote, p. 4.
78 Aristotle, p. 18.
79 Cascardi suspects that Cervantes was familiar enough with both Plato and
Aristotle to know that in works other than the Republic and the Poetics, each of
them set forth more nuanced views of the ‘place of imaginative literature in the
formation of the state’ and of the citizen. Cascardi’s view is that, according to
Cervantes, ‘fiction itself does political work, and does so through the invention
in words of possible worlds. The ordinary world—with all its heterogenerity, its
alternating stretches of consistency and inconsistency, irreducible to any single
kind—is one of them’ (‘Two Kinds…’, p. 421). I find Cascardi’s argument to be
innovative and convincing, but I think that on another level Cervantes saw
‘imaginative literature’ as deconstructive as much as constructive. If I am right
about this, then there is a sense in which Cervantes agrees with Plato; art is
indeed dangerous to the republic, or at least to those who hold power in it.
80 Canavaggio, p. 217.
81 Cervantes, Don Quixote, p. 4.
82 This topic is treated thoroughly by Martín, pp. 160–85.
83 Nabokov, p. 108.
Section 3
Cervantes’s Prose
Chapter 10
‘para empresas más altas y de
mayor importancia’
The rota Virgilii and the Orphic Poet in Miguel
de Cervantes’s La Galatea (1585)
Benjamin J. Nelson
The University of South Carolina Beaufort
Due to the popularity of Don Quixote and later works, Miguel de
Cervantes’s La Galatea (1585) has suffered from being overlooked,
forgotten, or even maligned. George Ticknor, for example, states that
Cervantes ‘was led by the spirit of the times, rather, perhaps, than by
his own taste, to begin—as an offering to the lady of his love—the
“Galatea”’.1 Later, Hugo Albert Rennert bluntly writes:
It [La Galatea] is, however, one of the poorest of all Cervantes’s works,
and gives little promise of his becoming the greatest name in the
literature of Spain…There seems to be no attempt at plot or connected
narrative, and it is with the greatest difficulty that the reader keeps
track of the various characters; a great number of shepherds and
shepherdesses (some one has said there are no less than seventy-one)
are brought successively upon the scene, and the maze of incidents is
almost inextricable.2
Upon concluding his analysis, Rennert labels Cervantes’s first prose
piece as being ‘a dull book’.3 Amadeu Solé-Leris agrees with Rennert by
stating that La Galatea ‘represents, together with some plays, an initial
unsuccessful bid to establish himself [Cervantes] as a writer’.4
Parting from the aforementioned critics, I argue that Cervantes, by
choosing the pastoral as his first substantial narrative, continues the
tradition of libros de pastores initiated by Montemayor’s La Diana and,
yet, supersedes it.5 Additionally, Cervantes introduces himself as an
Orphic poet who participates in the famed rota Virgilii, or Virgil’s
Wheel. The rota Virgilii may have originated from the enigmatic verses
that appeared in the frontispiece of a first-century edition of Virgil’s
Aeneid: ‘I am he who once tuned my song on a slender reed, / then,
leaving the woodland, compelled the neighbouring / fields to serve the
husbandman, however grasping— / a work welcome to farmers: but
now of Mars’ bristling’.6 By starting with the pastoral, a writer would
emulate the famed Virgil by later composing works comparable to the
Georgics and, afterwards, to the Aeneid.7
In the prologue to La Galatea, Cervantes responds to his readers’
curiosity on why this rather mature soldier-turned-author would pen a
pastoral novel as his first major novelistic enterprise. Entitled ‘Curiosos
lectores’ [‘Bystanding Readers’], these opening pages reflect the
readers’ inquisitiveness by responding to ‘la ocupación de escrebir [sic]
églogas en tiempo que, en general, la poesía anda tan desfavorecida’
[‘the occupation of composing eclogues in a time that, in general,
poetry walks so disfavoured’].8 Due to the inherent blend of prose and
poetry within a pastoral novel, Cervantes could have introduced
himself as a writer and poet, and, at the same time, initiated his literary
career via the rota Virgilii. In his study of Cervantes’s relation with the
rota Virgilii, Frederick de Armas warns that the literary career of this
famed 
Spaniard 
might 
not 
fully 
approximate 
Virgil’s 
cursus:
‘[Cervantes] begins with pastoral, continues with an apprenticeship in
epic, and culminates with epic. Although he wrote texts that do not
correspond to this pattern, he followed it in most of his major works so
that his career would be associated with the Virgilian cursus’.9 Within
the same prologue, the author states:
De más de que no puede negarse que los estudios de esta facultad [la
poesía] (en el pasado tiempo, con razón, tan estimada) traen consigo
más que medianos provechos, como son: enriquecer el poeta
considerando su propia lengua, y enseñorearse del artificio de la
elocuencia que ella cabe, para empresas más altas y de mayor
importancia, y abrir camino para que, a su imitación, los ánimos
estrechos, que la brevedad del lenguaje antiguo quieren que se acabe la
abundancia de la lengua castellana.
[In as much that one cannot deny that the studies of this faculty
[poetry] (so esteemed, with reason, in the past) bring with them more
than mediocre advantages, as they are: to enrich the poet considering
his own language, and to master the artifice of the eloquence that it
[poetry] contains, for higher enterprises and of greater importance, and
to lay out the path so that, in its imitation, the narrow spirits, will want
the brevity of the ancient language to end with the abundance of the
Spanish language.]10
While attempting to justify the poetic art contained in his literary
creation, Cervantes contrasts the brevity of ancient languages and the
relative abundance of modern ones, primarily Spanish. Although
Cervantes favours the latter, he also constructs a translatio studii, for he
is drawing upon Antiquity’s poetics as a basis for his poetic creations
scattered throughout the pages of La Galatea.11 The concluding
paragraphs of the prologue, in fact, further this translatio studii by
associating Cervantes himself with Virgil and reminding readers that
this great classical poet was also maligned for several of his eclogues—
the basis for the celebrated rota Virgilii:
pues el príncipe de la poesía latina fue calumniado en algunas de sus
églogas por haberse levantado más que en las otras; y así no temeré
mucho que alguno condene haber mezclado razones de filosofía entre
algunas amorosas de pastores, que pocas veces se levantan a más que a
tratar cosas del campo, y esto con su acostumbrada llaneza.
[for the prince of Latin poetry was slandered in some of his eclogues for
having raised himself more than in others; and so I shall not fear too
much if someone may condemn my having mixed philosophical
reasoning among the amorous talk of shepherds, for a few times they
are elevated more than just treating matters of the country, and doing
so with their customary simplicity.]12
The mention that Virgil was criticized for ‘haberse levantado más que
en las otras’ of his eclogues prepares readers that Cervantes, who may
have been attempting to approximate Virgil’s literary career, may have
attempted to go beyond their perceived standard norms of pastoral
novels and, by doing so, incorporated loftier themes (‘que pocas veces
se levantan a más que a tratar cosas del campo’), and even promote
Cervantes himself as an Orphic poet.
In the preliminary verses that follow the prologue, Don Luis de
Vargas Manrique offers a sonnet that suggests that Cervantes’s pastoral
continues the tradition already established by Montemayor:
Hicieron muestra en vos de su grandeza,
gran Cervantes, los dioses celestiales,
y cual primera, dones inmortales
sin tasa os repartió Naturaleza.
Jove su rayo os dio, que es la viveza
de palabras que mueven pedernales;
Dïana, en exceder a los mortales
en castidad de estilo con pureza.
[They showed signs in you of their grandeur,
great Cervantes, the celestial gods,
and which first, immortal gifts
without price Nature shared with you.
Jove gave you his ray, which is the liveliness
of words that move flints;
Diana, in exceeding mortals
in chastity of a pure style.]13
By invoking the two Greco-Roman deities Jupiter and Diana, Vargas
Manrique bestows upon the novice writer the artistic ability of
composing lively words that will move even stones (‘palabras que
mueven pedernales’) and possessing a pure, original style (‘de estilo con
pureza’). With the name of Diana mentioned, readers would
automatically recall Montemayor’s La Diana. Yet, in the same stanza,
Vargas Manrique constructs a comparison between Cervantes and a
figure unique to La Diana—Orpheus. Ovid reminds us the supernatural
powers Orpheus’s music had on nature: ‘While Orpheus sang his
minstrel’s songs and charmed / The rocks and woods and creatures of
the wild / To follow’.14 Thus, Vargas Manrique may be attempting to
label Cervantes as a new Spanish Orphic poet—a key feature to
understanding the poetic cursus of Montemayor’s text.15 As Cervantes
interjects poetry throughout the prose of La Galatea, his ambitious
poetic attempt will culminate in his epic-like ‘Canto de Calíope’, which
will be discussed later.
By mentioning Diana in the preliminary verses and presenting a
dichotomy between a refined shepherd (Sireno in La Diana and Elicio in
La Galatea) and a rustic one (Silvano in La Diana and Erastro in La
Galatea), Cervantes appears to be producing a pastoral tome
reminiscent of Montemayor’s creation. As other previous libros de
pastores, La Galatea continues the tradition of grounding the locus
amoenus within the confines of Iberia: ‘Esto cantaba Elicio, pastor en las
riberas de Tajo, con quien Naturaleza se mostró tan liberal cuanto la
Fortuna y el Amor’ [Elicio was singing this, shepherd along the shores
of the Tagus, with whom Nature showed herself as generous as much as
Fortune and Love].16 However, La Galatea breaks from this tradition.
Early on, Erastro confides to Elicio that he failed to find any remedy
that would cure his love sickness for the elusive, eponymous Galatea: ‘y
si otras tantas [mil veces] no he andado a los médicos y curas del lugar
a que me diesen remedio para las ansias que por su causa padezco. Los
unos me mandan que tome no sé qué bebedizos de paciencia; los otros
dicen que me encomiende a Dios, que todo lo cura, o que todo es
locura’ [and if another so [thousand times] I have not walked to the
doctors and village priests so that they would give me a remedy for the
anguishes that for her cause I suffer. The first ones order me to try I-
don’t-know-what potions of patience; the others tell me to entrust
myself to God, who cures all, or everything is madness].17 These
‘bebedizos de paciencia’, prescribed by doctors, bear a striking
resemblance to the magic elixirs of Montemayor’s Felicia. In
Cervantes’s narrative, however, no magical concoction can ameliorate
Erastro’s amorous anguish. An aficionado of pastoral novels would
undoubtedly have realized this two-fold connection between La Diana
and La Galatea. Although Cervantes could be informing his readers that
the initial inspiration for his pastoral work may have come from
Montemayor’s, at the same time he is declaring his artistic departure
from the progenitor.
After either implicitly or explicitly declaring his artistic separation
from La Diana, Cervantes furthers this distancing in the first libro by
transforming his locus amoenus into a nightmarish world with an event
relatively foreign to the Spanish pastoral novel—homicide:
por un espeso montecillo que a sus espaldas [las de Elicio y Erastro]
estaba, un no pequeño estruendo y ruido; y levantándose los dos en pie
por ver lo que era, vieron que del monte salía un pastor corriendo a la
mayor priesa del mundo, con un cuchillo desnudo en la mano, y la color
del rostro mudada; y que tras él venía otro ligero pastor, que a pocos
pasos alcanzó al primero, y, asiéndole por el cabezón del pellico,
levantó el brazo en el aire cuanto pudo, y un agudo puñal que sin vaina
traía se le escondió dos veces en el cuerpo.
[through a dense hillock that was to their backs [of Elicio and Erastro],
a no small din and noise; and raising to the their feet to see what it was,
they saw a shepherd leaving from the woodland running at the greatest
speed in the world, with a knife unsheathed in his hand, and the colour
of his face was changing; and behind him was approaching another
swift shepherd, who in a few steps caught up with the first one, and,
seizing him by the head-opening of his sheepskin jacket, raised his arm
in the air as much as he could, and hid a sharp, unsheathed dagger into
his body two times.]18
Distraught over Carino’s meddlesome interference in his love affair
with Leonida, Lisardo pursues Carino to avenge his beloved’s death. In
their joint study, Bruno Damiani and Barbara Mujica point out
Cervantes’s deviation from the already-established pastoral novels of
his time: ‘Perhaps because the characters’ passions seem stronger in La
Galatea than in any other pastoral novel, the wish for death often leads
to suicide attempts.’19 In addition to Carino’s death, La Galatea is
replete with homicide, suicidal thoughts, and even a kidnapping. Table
10.1 illustrates how La Galatea is populated with these brutalities.
Table 10.1. Homicide, suicidal thought, and kidnapping in La Galatea
Character Homicide, Suicidal Thought, and Kidnapping
Book
Carino
Murdered by Lisandro
I
Leonida
Murdered by Crisalvo and his henchmen (in Lisandro’s
narration)
I
Libeo
Murdered by Crisalvo and his henchmen (in Lisandro’s
narration)
I
Crisalvo
Murdered by Lisandro (in Lisandro’s narration)
I
Rosaura
Attempts suicide in Grisaldo’s presence
IV
Rosaura
Kidnapped by Artandro and his henchmen
V
Galercio
Attempts suicide in Gelasia’s presence
V
Galercio
Attempts suicide
VI
Lenio
Contemplates suicide
VI
In addition to an ideal place corrupted by its own inhabitants (as
seen above), even external forces threaten Cervantes’s locus amoenus.
During the narration of his doleful tale, the knight-courtier, not
shepherd, Silerio narrates the invasion of Turks while he and his
comrade Timbrio were residing in a Catalonian coastal town:
Poco más de media noche sería, hora acomodada a facinerosos insultos,
y en la cual la trabajada gente suele entregar los trabajados miembros
en brazos del dulce sueño, cuando improvisamente por todo el pueblo
se levantó una confusa vocería diciendo: «¡Al arma, al arma, que turcos
hay en la tierra!». Los ecos de estas tristes voces ¿quién duda que no
causaron espanto en los mujeriles pechos, y aun pusieron confusión en
los fuertes ánimos de los varones?
[It probably was a little past midnight, hour accommodated to
delinquent offenses, and in which the labouring people are accustomed
to hand over their laboured members into the arms of sweet sleep,
when suddenly throughout the town was raised a confused uproar
saying: ‘To arms, to arms, for there are Turks on land!’ The echoes of
these sad voices, who will doubt that they did not cause fright in the
women’s chests, and even put confusion in the strong spirits of the
men?]20
Although Cervantes narrates a fictitious attack on Spanish spoil, this
naval attack brought on by the Ottomans reflects a historical fear that
Christian Europeans, especially Spaniards and the inhabitants of
Spanish possessions, shared:
Since early 1566 the intelligence services of the West had not ceased to
convey alarming news of Turkish naval activity in the Mediterranean
and military movements on the Hungarian frontier. It was feared that
the aged Ottoman ruler, Suleiman the Magnificent, hoped to make one
last great drive against Christian Europe.21
In La Galatea, Silerio recounts the damage, pillaging, and overall
sacrilege caused by these merciless invaders:
A la luz de las furiosas llamas se vieron relucir los bárbaros alfanjes y
parecerse las blancas tocas de la turca gente, que, encendida, con
sigures o hachas de duro acero las puertas de las casas derribaban y,
entrando en ellas, de cristianos despojos salían cargados…La fiera y
endiablada canalla, viendo cuán poca resistencia se les hacía, se
atrevieron a entrar en los sagrados templos y poner las descomulgadas
manos en las santas reliquias poniendo en el seno el oro con que
guarnecidas estaban, y arrojándolas en el suelo con asqueroso
menosprecio…aquellos descreídos perros, los cuales, después de
abrasadas las casas, robado los templos, desflorado las vírgenes,
muertos los defensores, más cansados que satisfechos de lo hecho, al
tiempo que el alba venía sin impedimento alguno se volvieron a sus
bajeles, habiéndolos ya cargado de todo lo mejor que en el pueblo
había, dejándole desolado y sin gente, porque toda la más gente se
llevaban, y la otra a la montaña se había recogido.
[By the light of the furious flames the gleaming barbarous cutlasses
were seen and appeared the white hats of the Turkish people, which,
alit, with sickles or axes of hard steel were knocking down the doors of
the houses and, entering in them, were leaving loaded with Christian
spoils…The cruel and diabolical rabble, seeing how much little
resistance was made to them, dared to enter into the sacred temples and
place their excommunicated hands on the holy relics, putting into their
breasts the gold with which they were embellished, and throwing them
onto the floor with loathsome despise…those infidel dogs, which, after
setting fire to the homes, robbing temples, deflowering virgins, killing
the defenders, more tired than satisfied of what they have done, when
the dawn was approaching without any impediment some returned to
their vessels, having already loaded them all the best that there was in
town, leaving it desolated and without people, because most of the
people were carried away, and the other had gathered together at the
mountain.]22
Thus, the locus amoenus that Cervantes paints in the pages of his
pastoral novel is one that has become unstable and threatening due to
its internal and external problems.23 As critics have attempted to
categorize the bucolic world displayed in Spanish pastoral novels as
‘myth’ and reality as ‘history’, Cervantes demonstrates artistically how
‘history’ can unravel the ‘myth’ that the fragile pastoral world struggles
to maintain.24
Although critics have demonstrated that Cervantes approximates the
rota Virgilii via his three novelistic enterprises—La Galatea, El ingenioso
hidalgo Quijote de la Mancha, and Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda, I
argue that Cervantes accomplishes the same by presenting the entire
rota in the same text. Cervantes, who was already in his late thirties,
could not have foreseen in the first half of the 1580s that he would
have been composing his later masterpieces. Therefore, planning a
cumbersome project of composing three separate works to encompass
Virgil’s literary model could have appeared too ambitious for this ex-
soldier. Incorporating the three literary genres into one work, however,
would have seemed more plausible. As I have discussed earlier, the
Prólogo of La Galatea establishes the text as being pastoral, although the
author posits throughout the narrative several deviations from the
established norm of this literary mode.
In the six-part La Galatea, Cervantes places an epithalamium, to
celebrate the wedding nuptials of Daranio and Silveria, in the third
book. Recited by four cultos shepherds, this marital poem is presented
superficially as an égloga [eclogue]: ‘para efecto de que los cuatro
discretos y lastimados pastores Orompo, Marsilio, Crisio y Orfenio, por
honrar las bodas de su amigo Daranio y por satisfacer el deseo que Tirsi
y Damón tenían de escucharles, querían allí en público recitar una
égloga que ellos mesmos de la ocasión de sus mesmos dolores habían
compuesto’ [‘for the effect of the four discrete and doleful shepherds
Orompo, Marsilio, Crisio, and Orfenio, to honour the wedding of their
friend Daranio and to satisfy the desire that Tirsi and Damon had of
listening to them, wanted there to recite in public an eclogue that they
themselves had composed for the occasion out of their own pains’].25
Assuming the role of Orpheus, Cervantes incorporates his poetic
voice in the figure of Orfenio, a name which closely resembles the
Spanish Orfeo. In shepherd’s garb, Orfenio forms part of the quartet
that performs the epithalamium for Daranio and Silveria’s nuptials. As
Thomas Deveny points out, epithalamia are not uncommon to the
pastoral, citing the classical example of Theocritus’s ‘Idyll 18’, an
epithalamium written for the marriage of Helen and Menelaus.26 While
discussing La Galatea, Deveny mentions the curious nature that
Cervantes’s pastoral creation contains not one, but two epithalamia.27
The presence of this unique poetic duality may point to Cervantes’s
loftier aspiration to fulfil the coveted rota Virgilii.
Although appearing as a simple rustic wedding, the marriage of
Daranio and Silveria betrays the pastoral confines in which it is framed.
Since La Galatea presents itself in the opening of the prologue as a
pastoral, this wedding, as I argue, approximates more Virgil’s Georgics
—fulfilling the second rung of the rota. What announces this literary
departure from the pastoral mode coincides with the entrance of the
bridegroom himself: ‘A esta sazón salió el rico pastor Daranio a la
serrana vestido: traía camisa alta de cuello plegado, almilla de frisa,
sayo verde escotado, zaragüelles de delgado lienzo, antiparas azules,
zapato redondo, cinto tachonado, y de la color del sayo, una cuarteada
caperuza’ [‘At that time the rich shepherd Daranio stepped out dressed
as an highlander: he was wearing a tall shirt with a pleated collar, an
under waistcoat of frizz, a low-necked green frock, breeches of thin
linen, blue gaiters, round shoe, a studded belt, and of the colour of the
frock, a quartered hood’].28 Having Daranio dressed ‘a la serrana’, as
Francisco López Estrada and María Teresa López García-Berdoy point
out, fashionably separates him from his pastoral brethren: ‘Cervantes
specifies the condition of Daranio’s clothing: according to the manner
of the people of the mountains, more durable than that of the plains’.29
Comprised of four shepherds, this epithalamium is presented as a
simple égloga but structured as a dramatic piece, indicating its
importance: ‘Acomodados, pues, en sus asientos todos los pastores y
pastoras que allí estaban, después que la zampoña de Erastro y la lira
de Lenio y los otros instrumentos hicieron prestar a los presentes un
sosegado y maravilloso silencio, el primero que se mostró en el humilde
teatro fue el triste Orompo’ [‘All the shepherds and shepherdesses
there, then, were accommodated in their seats, after Erastro’s reed
pipe, Lenio’s lyre and other instruments presented to the attendees a
peaceful and marvellous silence, the first one who showed himself in
the humble theatre was the sad Orompo’].30 Bemoaning their pitiful
amorous states, these four shepherds enter into a poetic competition to
determine who has suffered the most: Orompo, whose Listea is
deceased; Marsilio, whose Belisa treats him with scorn; Crisio, whose
Claraura is absent; and Orfenio, who suffers from jealousy over the
unnamed object of his desire.
Throughout this epithalamium, the singers continually reassure
themselves that they and the objects of their amorous desires are
shepherds: ‘¿Do estáis agora, gallardos pastores?’ [‘Where are you now,
gallant shepherds?’]31 Near the conclusion of their poetic performance,
Crisio reminds them of their pastoral responsibilities: ‘Hágase lo que
pide Orompo agora, / pues ya de recoger nuestro ganado / se va
llegando a más andar la hora’ [Let’s now do what Orompo requests, /
well now for gathering our flocks / the hour is arriving to depart].32 A
cursory reading of this eclogue, therefore, does not appear to fulfil
Cervantes’s higher poetic aspirations. In the exordium of his lament
over his beloved’s demise, Orompo evokes his ‘palabras sangrientas,
con muerte mezcladas’ [‘bloody words, mixed with death’] to describe
his deplorable state.33 While describing these same words, however,
Orompo describes their loftier purpose: ‘Poco perdéis en verso perdidas,
/ pues ya os ha faltado el alto sujeto / por quien en estilo grave y
perfecto / hablábades cosas de punto subidas’ [‘Little you lose lost in
verse, / then now you have lacked the high subject / for whom in a low
and perfect style / you were speaking matters elevated a point’].34 By
mentioning that Orompo and his fellow poets will be discussing an ‘alto
sujeto’ in the disguise of an égloga (‘en estilo grave y perfecto’) mimics,
I argue, less Virgil’s Eclogues and more his later Georgics.
Having epithalamia, or love poetry, representing an author’s
progression on the coveted rota Virgilii was commonplace during the
Renaissance. In his analysis of Edmund Spenser’s poetry, Patrick
Cheney first confesses that Spenser transcended the natural order as
dictated by the rota Virgilii, for this English poet composed his 1579
bucolic The Shepherds Calendar and the first part (Books I–III) of his
epic The Faerie Queen in 1590 before publishing his 1595 Amoretti and
Epithalamion. In his discussion on how this latter work figures in the
rota Virgilii, Richard Neuse comments on how a marriage, an
epithalamion, presents the transformation of a poet like Spenser:
the epithalamic represents a triumph of the poetic eros that had
remained baffled in the Shepheardes Calender. By this eros I mean in the
first place the impulse toward union in its various manifestations, an
impulse in which the self seeks completion through being united with
something beyond itself. The epithalamic ritual, therefore, in the course
of which the many-layered reality of the wedding day is evoked, is no
mere ritual but becomes for the poet, its priest and master of
ceremonies, a symbol of his intimate participation in that reality.35
Thus, Cheney comments on how Spenser’s Amoretti and Epithalamion
emulates Virgil’s Georgics: ‘In Epithalamion, I would add, Spenser also
resolves or releases tensions about the writing of a visionary marriage
poem. The greatest tension is the one I believe a sixteenth-century poet
like Spenser most pressingly inherits: the problematic role of the love
lyric in a laureate career’.36
Although 
throughout 
Cervantes’s 
epithalamium 
the 
singers
constantly remind their listeners of their pastoral state, the poetic
language employed to describe their doleful existence approximates
more that found in the Georgics. To describe how Belisa’s scorn has
affected him, Marsilio compares himself to a sailor:
Más sorda a mi lamento,
más implacable y fiera
que a la voz del cansado marinero
el riguroso viento
que el mar turba y altera
y amenaza a la vida el fin postrero
[Deafer to my lament,
more implacable and cruel
than to the voice of the weary sailor
the rigorous wind
that stirs up and alters the sea
and the last end threatens his life]37
The mention of the profession of sailor exceeds the limits of a
bucolic world and is better suited for a farming one. Later, Orompo
compares himself to a profession befitting Virgil’s Georgics, that of a
labrador:
Yo quedé cual labrador
que del trabajo contino
de su espaciosa labor
fruto amargo de dolor
le concede su destino
[I remained such a labourer
who of the continual work
of his spacious labour
bitter fruit of pain
his destiny concedes to him]38
Following a similar pattern, Orfenio associates himself with a farmer
who plants and reaps what he sows:
El fruto que fue sembrado
por mi trabajo contino,
a dulce sazón llegado,
fue con próspero destino
en mi poder entregado.
[The fruit that was sown
by my continual work,
arrived at a sweet moment,
it was prosperous destiny
in my surrendered power.]39
Although utilized to heighten their poetic expressions, the professions
expressed by these shepherds release them from the thematic confines
of an eclogue to express with words what Orompo hoped for at the
beginning of their epithalamium—an ‘alto sujeto’. As I have mentioned
earlier, Crisio, who does not compare his grief with another profession,
has to remind them that they are shepherds with the pressing
responsibility of taking care of their herds.40 The poetic competition
over who has suffered the most does not end with a clear winner
announced, for the wedding guests (and subsequently the readers) have
to decide for themselves. Thus, after the conclusion of the
epithalamium, the discretos shepherds Damón and Tirsi comment how
this performed égloga exceeded their expectations—reinforcing that
Cervantes’s 
elongated 
poem 
is 
loftier 
than 
a 
mere 
bucolic
composition.41 Upon discussing which shepherd’s situation merits the
most pity, they conclude that, interestingly enough, Orfenio and his
jealousy is the most dire amorous condition—eclipsing a lover’s death,
absence, or scorn.42 As I have mentioned earlier, ‘Orfenio’ closely
approximates the name ‘Orfeo’. Later in La Galatea, the reader realizes
that Orfenio’s poetry is designated for ‘loftier topics’, for, when the
knight-courtiers Silerio and Timbrio and the two damas Nísida and
Blanca are reunited, only Orfenio can accompany their songs with his
instrument playing.43 By placing this epithalamium in the centre of his
pastoral novel, Cervantes, cognizant of the literary integration of the
rota Virgilii within the confines of a single literary work, achieves the
task of integrating Virgil’s Eclogues and Georgics. What remains to fully
imitate this classic literary career is an epic poem, which Cervantes
presents in the final book of his La Galatea.
In the sixth and final libro of La Galatea, the shepherds sojourn to the
funeral of another shepherd, Meliso, at the Valle de los Cipreses. With
the pagan, not Christian, funeral rites directed by Telesio, Cervantes
announces the fulfilment of the rota Virgilii with an impending epic
poem. During these ceremonies, Telesio indirectly references Virgil’s
Aeneid by incorporating the cypress tree:
Y, en diciendo esto, [Telesio] se llegó a un ciprés de aquellos y,
cortando algunas ramas, hizo de ellas una funesta guirnalda con que
coronó sus blancas y veneradas sienes, haciendo señal a los demás que
lo mesmo hiciesen, de cuyo ejemplo movidos todos, en un momento se
coronaron de las tristes ramas…Hecho esto, mandó Telesio encender el
sacro fuego, y en un momento alrededor de la sepultura se hicieron
muchas, aunque pequeñas, hogueras, en las cuales solas ramas de ciprés
se quemaban.
[And, in saying this, [Telesio] arrived at one cypress of those and,
cutting some branches, made of them an ill-fated garland with which he
crowned his white and venerated temples, signalling to the rest that
they do the same, by whose example all were moved, in a moment they
crowned themselves with the sad branches…This being done, Telesio
ordered for a sacred fire to be lit, and in a moment around the
sepulchre many, although small, bonfires were made, in which only
cypress branches were burnt.]44
In the sixth book of the Aeneid, Aeneas witnesses the burial of Misenus,
which incorporates the cypress: ‘No less meanwhile on the beach the
Teucrians were weeping for Misenus and paying the last dues to the
thankless dust. And first they raise a huge pyre, rich with pitchy pine
and oaken logs. Its sides they entwine with sombre foliage, set in front
funereal cypresses, and adorn it above with gleaming arms.’45 Since
parallels may be drawn between the burial of Virgil’s Misenus and that
of Cervantes’s Meliso, the reader might expect the inclusion of an epic-
like work in the pages of La Galatea. After the funeral rites for the
departed shepherd have been performed, a fantastic event occurs over
the gravesite with the appearance of ‘un grande y maravilloso fuego,
tan luciente y claro, que en un momento todo el escuro valle quedó con
tanta claridad como si el mesmo sol le alumbrara’ [‘a great and
marvellous fire, so bright and clear, that in a moment the entire dark
valley remained with so much clarity as if the sun itself illuminated
it’].46
As Varius and Augustus Caesar intervened to rescue Virgil’s Aeneid
from its doomed fiery grave, Cervantes has Calliope, the muse of epic
poetry, leap out of the flames to deliver his epic—the ‘Canto de
Calíope’. Like the celebrated Aeneid, Cervantes’s poem is also saved and
recited so that future generations may remember it. Before reciting the
verses of her prepared poem, Calliope reaffirms her status as the muse
for matters that are, as Cervantes wrote in his prologue, ‘levantado más
que en las otras’: ‘Mi nombre es Calíope; mi oficio y condición es
favorecer y ayudar a los divinos espíritus, cuyo loable ejercicio es
ocuparse en la maravillosa y jamás como debe alabada ciencia de la
Poesía’ [‘My name is Calliope; my occupation and condition is to favour
and help divine spirits, whose praiseworthy exercise is to take part in
the marvellous and never-as-it-should-be-praised science of Poetry’].47
She then proceeds to name famed poets throughout history she has
favoured: Homer, Virgil, Catullus, Horace, Propertius, Petrarch, Dante,
Ariosto, Boscán, Garcilaso, Castillejo, Torres Naharro, Francisco de
Aldana, Hernando de Acuña, and Diego Hurtado de Mendoza. By
mentioning these celebrated writers both classical and contemporary,
Cervantes achieves a translatio studii by having Calliope present to
recite 
his 
composed 
verses 
and, 
thus, 
include 
him 
in 
the
aforementioned throng of celebrated poets.
In the exordium of her canto, Calliope announces the topic of her
verses:
Al dulce son de mi templada lira
prestad, pastores, el oído atento:
oiréis cómo en mi voz y en él respira
de mis hermanas el sagrado aliento.
Veréis cómo os suspende, y os admira
y colma vuestras almas de contento,
cuando os dé relación, aquí en el suelo,
de los ingenios que ya son del Cielo.
Pienso cantar de aquellos solamente
a quien la Parca el hilo aún no ha cortado,
de aquellos que son dignos justamente
de en tal lugar tenerle señalado,
donde, a pesar del tiempo diligente,
por el laudable oficio acostumbrado
vuestro, vivan mil siglos sus renombres,
sus claras obras, sus famosos nombres.
[To the sweet sound of my tuned lyre
lend, shepherds, your attentive ear:
you shall hear how in my voice and in it breathes
the sacred breath of my sisters.
You shall see how it astonishes you, and admires you
and fills your souls up with contentment,
when I give you an account, here on the ground,
of the ingenuous ones who are already in Heaven.
I plan to sing only of those
to whom the Fates have not yet cut their thread,
of those who are justly worthy
of being named in such place,
where, despite assiduous time,
for the praiseworthy occupation customary
to you, may live for a thousand centuries their fame,
their lucid works, their famous names.]48
In this ‘disproportionately bulky section’,49 Calliope chooses not to
honour the already-deceased poets but those who are still alive, or
rather, ‘a quien la Parca el hilo aún no ha cortado’. Cervantes presents
a poem that contains a total of 111 stanzas. Although a detailed study
of all the poets that Calliope mentions would exceed the confines of the
present study, I would like to focus on two distinct stanzas.
Early in her canto, this muse of epic poetry praises don Alonso de
Ercilla and his celebrated La Araucana. The fourth stanza reads:
Otro del mesmo nombre, que de Arauco
cantó las guerras y el valor de España
el cual los reinos donde habita Glauco
pasó y sintió la embravecida saña;
no fue en voz, no fue su acento rauco,
que uno y otro fue de gracia,
y tal, que Ercil[l]a, en este hermoso asiento,
merece eterno y sacro monumento.
[Another by the same name, that of Araucan
sang the wars and valour of Spain
which the reigns where Glauco inhabits
happened and felt the enraged fury;
it was not in voice, it was not his raucous accent,
that it was one and another of grace
and so, that Ercilla, in this beautiful seat,
deserves eternal and sacred monument.]50
Although the ‘Canto de Calíope’ does not meet the standard
requirements to be classified as being an epic poem, Cervantes
circumvents these necessities by referencing others who have written
epic poems or epic-like verses. In a later stanza, in fact, Calliope
mentions how Spanish poets have accomplished a translatio studii from
Antiquity by possessing the capability of composing verses similar to
those of the most celebrated classical poets of epics. In the eighteenth
stanza, this muse sings:
Aquel ingenio que al mayor humano
se deja atrás, y aspira al que es divino,
y, dejando a una parte el castellano,
sigue el heroico verso del latino;
el nuevo Homero, el nuevo mantuano,
es el maestro Córdoba, que es digno
de celebrarse en la dichosa España,
y en cuanto el sol alumbra y el mar baña.
[That ingenious one who to the greatest human
is left behind, and breathes in what is divine,
and, leaving Spanish to one side,
follows the heroic verse of Latin;
the new Homer, the new Mantuan,
he is the Cordovan master, who is worthy
of being celebrated in fortunate Spain,
and in as much the sun illuminates and the sea bathes.]51
According to Francisco López Estrada and María Teresa López García-
Berdoy, this ‘maestro Córdoba’ is Juan de Córdoba, an acquaintance of
Lope de Vega.52 Describing this poet as a new Homer and a new Virgil
(‘el nuevo mantuano’), Cervantes reminds the reader, albeit indirectly,
of the rota Virgilii that he has strived to accomplish within the confines
of La Galatea.
After reciting her lofty verses, Calliope departs as the flames from
which she first appeared extinguish themselves. To close the funeral
ceremonies that have honoured the deceased Meliso, Telesio
summarizes the importance of the ‘Canto de Calíope’ and the grandeur
of contemporary Spanish poetry, in which Cervantes has just
participated:
Y no penséis que es pequeño el gusto que he recibido en saber por tan
verdadera relación cuán grande es el número de los divinos ingenios
que en nuestra España hoy viven, porque siempre ha estado y está en
opinión de todas las naciones extranjeras que no son muchos, sino
pocos, los espíritus que le tienen levantado, siendo tan al revés como se
parece, pues cada uno de los que la ninfa ha nombrado al más agudo
extranjero se aventaja, y darían claras muestras de ello, si en esta
nuestra España se estimase en tanto la poesía como en otras provincias
se estima.
[And do not think it is small the pleasure that I have received in
knowing for such a true account on how great is the number of the
divine ingenious ones who today live in our Spain, because it always
has been and is the opinion of all foreign nations that there are not
many, but rather few, the spirits who have raised it, being such to the
contrary as it appears, then each one of those that the nymph has
named exceeds the most acute foreigner, and they would give clear
signs of it, if the poetry in this Spain of ours was esteemed as much as it
is esteemed in other provinces.]53
In conclusion, although early criticism has largely dismissed
Cervantes’s first endeavour into prose, this overshadowed pastoral
romance stands alone as this author’s attempt to present himself as an
Orphic poet. Within the confines of this bucolic text, he pursues the
famed rota Virgilii by incorporating poems that surpasses the
expectations of the low-style normally expected of shepherds’ songs.
Along with discussing his artistic plan in the prologue to incorporate
themes of great(er) importance, Cervantes appears to first follow the
already-established tradition of Spain’s libros de pastores. Yet, shortly
within the narrative, Cervantes breaks the established mould and, thus,
makes his narrative stand out by presenting a Spanish locus amoenus
that is threatened by internal (e.g. homicides, suicides, and
kidnappings) and external forces (e.g. Turkish battles both by land and
by sea). Within this space, he presents himself to his reader, as Luis de
Vargas Manrique describes him, as a new Orpheus within the mixture
of prose and poetry. With the four shepherds’ epithalamium and the
‘Canto de Calíope’, Cervantes participates within the rota Virgilii to
achieve his own artistic grandeur. Reading La Galatea as such, redeems
the text from its muddied literary criticism past and relative obscurity
due to the unmitigated success of Don Quixote and other later works.
Works Cited
Avalle-Arce, Juan Bautista. La novela pastoril española, 2nd edn. (Madrid:
Ediciones Istmo, 1974).
Castillo Martínez, Cristina. ‘La violencia en los libros de pastores’. Revista de
Literatura 72, no. 143 (2010): pp. 55–68.
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. El ingenioso hidalgo don Quijote de la Mancha,
edited by L. A. Murillo (Madrid: Castalia, 1978).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. La Galatea, edited by Francisco López Estrada
and María Teresa López García-Berdoy (Madrid: Cátedra, 1999).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. The Ingenious Hidalgo Don Quixote de la Mancha,
translated by John Rutherford (New York: Penguin Books, 2003).
Cheney, Patrick Gerard. Spenser’s Famous Flight: A Renaissance Idea of a Literary
Career. (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1993).
Damiani, Bruno Mario, and Barbara Louise Mujica. Et in Arcadia ego: Essays on
Death in the Pastoral Novel (Lanham, MD: UP of America, 1990).
De Armas, Frederick A. ‘Cervantes and the Virgilian Wheel: The Portrayal of a
Literary Career’. In European Literary Careers: The Author from Antiquity to the
Renaissance, edited by Patrick Gerard Cheney and De Armas (Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 2002), pp. 268–85.
Deveny, Thomas. ‘The Pastoral and the Epithalamium of the Spanish Golden
Age’. In Cervantes and the Pastoral, edited by José J. Labrador and Juan
Fernández Jiménez (Erie, PA: Penn State-Behrend College Symposium, 1986),
pp. 81–99.
Finello, Dominick. Pastoral Themes and Forms in Cervantes’s Fiction (Lewisburg:
Bucknell UP, 1994).
Hernández-Pecoraro, Rosalie. Bucolic Metaphors: History, Subjectivity, and Gender
in the Early Modern Spanish Pastoral (Chapel Hill: The University of North
Carolina Press, 2006).
Kamen, Henry Arthur Francis. Empire: How Spain Became a World Power, 1492–
1763 (New York: HarperCollins, 2003).
Labrador, José J. and Juan Fernández Jiménez. Cervantes and the Pastoral:
Proceedings (Erie, PA: Penn State–Behrend Collage Symposium, 1986).
López Estrada, Francisco. La Galatea de Cervantes (La Laguna de Tenerife:
Universidad de La Laguna, 1948).
Nelson, Benjamin J. ‘Ovidian Fame: Garcilaso de la Vega and Jorge de
Montemayor as Orphic Voices in Early Modern Spain and the Contamino of
the Orpheus and Eurydice Myth’. In Ovid in the Age of Cervantes, edited by
Frederick de Armas (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2010), pp. 203–25.
Neuse, Richard. ‘Milton and Spenser: The Virgilian Triad Revisted’. ELH 45, n.4
(1978): pp. 606–39.
Ovid. Metamorphoses, translated by E. J. Kenney (Oxford: Oxford UP, 1986).
Rennert, Hugo Albert. The Spanish Pastoral Romances (Philadelphia, 1912).
Ricciardelli, Michele. Originalidad de La Galatea en la novela pastoril española
(Montevideo: Imprenta García S. A., 1966).
Solé-Leris, Amadeu. The Spanish Pastoral Novel (Boston: Twayne Publishers,
1980).
Ticknor, George. History of Spanish Literature, 6th edn. (Boston: Houghton
Mifflin and Company, 1891).
Vega, Lope de. La dama boba (Madrid: Cátedra, 1989).
Vega, Lope de. La viuda valenciana (Madrid: Castalia, 2001).
Virgil. Eclogues, Georgics, Aeneid I–VI, translated by H. Rushton Fairclough
(Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1999).
1 Ticknor, p. 101.
2 Rennert, p. 116.
3 Rennert, p. 122.
4 Solé-Leris, p. 69. Much later, however, Juan Bautista Avalle-Arce redeems
the literary merit of La Galatea by stating that Cervantes presents a ‘poetic’
world, which is invaded by the ‘historical’ circumstance, for the reader, for
example, is presented with the refined Elicio (the ‘poetic’) and the rustic Erastro
(the ‘historical’) (Avalle-Arce, pp. 243–4). Yet, Avalle-Arce cannot refrain from
comparing elements of this pastoral novel to episodes in Cervantes’s later
works. Due to Cervantes’s later unmitigated success as a writer, critics
throughout the twentieth century have generated book-length studies of La
Galatea. Francisco López Estrada and Michele Ricciardelli both analyzed various
elements of this pastoral novel, including the concepts of nature, fortune, time,
and love, and possible literary sources. Concerning the use of pastoral in all of
Cervantes’s works of fiction, critics Dominick Finello and José J. Labrador et al.
have studied the various connections between the pastoral episodes.
5 In terms of Cervantes’s own opinion of La Galatea, he provides his own
review during the oft-quoted reaction of the curate priest’s upon discovering
this tome in Don Quixote’s (Alonso Quijano’s) library: ‘Muchos años ha que es
grande amigo mío ese Cervantes, y sé que es más versado en desdichas que en
versos. Su libro tiene algo de buena invención; propone algo, y no concluye
nada: es menester esperar la segunda parte promete; quizá con la emienda
alcanzará del todo la misericordia que ahora se le niega’ (Cervantes, El ingenioso
hidalgo, pp. 120–1) [‘That fellow Cervantes has been a good friend of mine for
years, and I know he’s more conversant with adversity than with verse. His
book’s ingenious enough; it sets out to achieve something but doesn’t bring
anything to a conclusion; we’ll have to wait for the promised second part;
maybe with correction it’ll gain the full pardon denied it for the time being’]
(Cervantes, The Ingenious Hidalgo, p. 58). Additionally, Lope de Vega indicates
the popularity and circulation of La Galatea in his own dramatic works. In La
dama boba (1613), for example, Otavio, describing to Misenio the literary
collection of Nise, lists: ‘Historia de dos amantes, / sacada de lengua griega; /
Rimas, de Lope de Vega; / Galatea, de Cervantes’ (Vega, p. 146, vv. 2117–20)
[The Story of the Two Lovers,/taken from the Greek language; / Rhymes, by Lope
de Vega; / Galatea, by Cervantes]. Otón, in La viuda valencia (1620), offers the
following books to Leonarda: ‘Aquéste es la Galatea, / que si buen libro desea, /
no tiene más que pedir. / Fue su autor Miguel Cervantes, / que allá en la Naval
perdió / una mano…’ [This one is the Galatea, / that if you desire a good book,
/ you do not have to ask for more. / It was its author Miguel de Cervantes, /
who away in the Navy lost/a hand…] (Vega, p. 162, vv. 846–51). Unless stated
otherwise, all translations are mine.
6 Virgil, p. 261.
7 In his translation of the Aeneid, H. R. Fairclough comments that the word
‘ego’ misled ancient commentators into believing that these quoted verses were
‘composed by the poet himself and then deleted by his editor Varius’ (Virgil, p.
261). Due to this error, later commentators and readers of the Aeneid thought
that Virgil was offering to them advice on how to model their poetic enterprises
to garner eternal literary fame for themselves.
8 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 155.
9 De Armas, p. 270.
10 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 156.
11 Francisco López Estrada and María Teresa López García-Berdoy observe
this contrast between the two languages and Cervantes’s preference for modern
Spanish (Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 156, n. 11).
12 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 158.
13 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 161.
14 Ovid, p. 149.
15 For the discussion of Montemayor’s portrayal of himself as an Orphic poet,
see Nelson.
16 Cervantes, La Galatea, pp. 166–7.
17 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 174. See Hernández-Pecoraro for discussion of
the portrayal of shepherdesses as objects of desire.
18 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 179–80. Murder, however, is not an uncommon
event in the bucolic world. Returning to Montemayor’s La Diana, one can easily
recall Felismena’s slaughtering of three salvajes (in Book II), but, unlike
Cervantes’s blatant homicide, these three (almost mythical) wild beasts were
intruders threatening the tenuous stability of the locus amoenus by abducting its
nymphs. For a more extensive discussion of violence within the libros de
pastores, see Castillo Martίnez.
19 Damiani, p. 70.
20 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 280.
21 Kamen, p. 183.
22 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 281.
23 This Turkish threat is not only limited to Catalonia. After Timbrio and
Silerio are united again, Timbrio narrates how, after discovering Nísida and
Blanca on a boat, the crew spotted a small Turkish fleet: ‘Uno de ellos, que a
una parte de la proa iba sentado, descubrió, con la claridad de los bajos rayos
de la luna, que cuatro bajeles de remo, a larga y tirada boga, con gran celeridad
y priesa hacia la nave se encaminaban, y al momento conoció ser de contrarios,
y con grandes voces comenzó a gritar: «¡Arma, arma, que bajeles turquescos se
descubren!»‘ [One of them, who on one part of the prow was seated, discovered,
with the clarity of the dim rays of the moon, that four rowing vessels, at long
and pulled rowing, with great speed and hurry directed themselves toward the
ship, and at the moment of knowing them to be adversaries, with great voices
he began to shout: ‘Arms, arms, for Turkish vessels have been discovered!’]
(Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 491). After a grueling naval battle, the victorious
Turks take the surviving Christian crew as prisoners of Arnaute, ‘el general de
los bajeles’ [‘the general of the vessels’] (Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 494). While
heading to the Barbary Coast, a fierce storm breaks out, scattering the fleet and
directing the boat containing the Christian prisoners toward Catalonia.
Desperate, the Turks ‘rogaban a los cristianos que iban al remo cautivos que
invocasen y llamasen a sus santos y a su Cristo para que de tal desventura los
librase’ [‘begged the Christians who were rowing captives to invoke and call
upon their saints and their Christ so that he would free them from such
misadventure’] (Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 496). Reaching the shore, the Turks
and captured Christians encounter a small army of armed soldiers who
‘esperaban [a los turcos] con deseo de vengarse de la ofensa que estos mesmos
turcos les habían hecho saqueándoles su lugar’ [‘were waiting [for the Turks]
with a desire to exact revenge for the offense that these same Turks had done to
them, plundering their village’] (Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 497). This desire for
revenge results in a ‘tan cruel matanza en los cosarios que muy pocos quedaron
con la vida’ [‘so cruel slaughtering of the corsairs that a very few remained
alive’] (Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 497). The slaughter of the Turks completes
Silerio’s narrated tale of when the Turks earlier invaded this region. At the same
time, however, these two episodes illustrate the on-going battle between the
Hapsburg and Ottoman Dynasties.
24 See Avalle-Arce.
25 Cervantes, La Galatea, pp. 344–5.
26 Deveny, p. 81.
27 Deveny, p. 84.
28 Cervantes, La Galatea, pp. 338–9.
29 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 338, n. 61.
30 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 345.
31 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 348, v. 69. When quoting the poem, I provide the
page number first and then the verse number(s) for easier reference.
32 Cervantes, p. 366, vv. 617–19.
33 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 346, v. 2.
34 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 346, vv. 9–12.
35 Neuse, p. 617.
36 Cheney, p. 188.
37 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 350, vv. 128–33.
38 Cervantes, La Galatea, pp. 359–60, vv. 93–7.
39 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 362, vv. 473–7.
40 Francisco López Estrada and María Teresa López García-Berdoy discuss
how Crisio’s reminder is reminiscent of how Virgil would end his Eclogues with
the shepherds gathering their flocks and returning home (Cervantes, La Galatea,
p. 366, n. 108).
41 ‘especialmente a Damón y a Tirsi, que gran contento en oírlos recibieron,
pareciéndoles que más que de pastoril ingenio parecían las razones y
argumentos que para salir con su propósito los cuatro pastores habían
propuesto’ [especially to Damon and Tirsi, who received great contentment in
hearing them, seeming to them that their reasons and arguments seemed more
than of pastoral ingenuity than the four shepherds had proposed with their
intention] (Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 369).
42 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 369.
43 Cervantes, La Galatea, pp. 520–2.
44 Cervantes, La Galatea, pp. 545–6.
45 Virgil, Aeneid, p. 547.
46 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 558.
47 Cervantes, La Galatea, pp. 560–1.
48 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 563, vv. 1–16.
49 Solé-Leris, p. 85.
50 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 564, vv. 25–32.
51 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 567, vv. 137–44.
52 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 634.
53 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 590.
Chapter 11
Novelas ejemplares (1613)
Barry Ife
King’s College London and the Guildhall School of Music & Drama
Madrid, autumn 1613. A man enters a bookshop on the Calle Mayor in
search of something to read. This is not just any bookshop: these are
the premises of Francisco de Robles, ‘librero del Rey nuestro Señor’,
bookseller by appointment to King Philip III, and ‘the most successful
and powerful bookseller in Madrid’.1 His shop was the Hatchards, the
Barnes & Noble, of seventeenth-century Spain.
Our reader has come here with a particular end in view. He and his
family enjoyed reading Don Quixote when it first came out in 1605, but
Cervantes has produced nothing since then. Now, the tertulias are abuzz
with the news that he has—at long last—produced another book.
Robles was an obvious choice as publisher: he had published Don
Quixote in 1605 and, twenty years earlier, in Alcalá de Henares, his
father Blas had brought out Cervantes’s first novel, La Galatea (1585).
Now, in early autumn 1613, Robles is finally able to offer our book-
buyer, from among the thousands of titles he has in stock, a new work
by Miguel de Cervantes, the Novelas ejemplares.
Book-buying in 1613 was a rather different experience from what
we are familiar with today. For a start, most books were sold unbound.
It was normal to purchase the printed sheets and send them off to be
custom-bound to meet the needs or aspirations of the owner:
serviceable vellum, or a uniform calf binding embossed in gilt if the
book was destined for a private library. But in the bookshop a book
without a cover is difficult to judge. There were none of the obvious
clues to the contents that we rely on today: no seductive dust jacket, no
blurb and, often, no portrait of the author, something that seems to
have exercised Cervantes, if we are to believe what he says in the
prologue of the Novelas ejemplares. An engraved frontispiece had been
planned but did not materialise, and Cervantes was left to fill the gap
with a self-portrait in words.2
And, of course, there was no attendant PR industry: no book launch,
no reviews, no literary prizes or other means of promoting the author.
Literary celebrity depended on word of mouth, a bookseller’s
recommendation (‘if you enjoyed Don Quixote you might also enjoy the
Novelas ejemplares’), or the occasional disparaging mention in the work
of a jealous rival.
But the seventeenth-century book-buyer was not entirely without
guidance in his choice of reading. Books from this period came with
extensive preliminaries or ‘paratexts’, in which writers and publishers
did their best to catch the attention of potential purchasers and
reassure them that their money would be well spent. If we assume that
Robles had a shop copy of the Novelas ejemplares ready bound for
browsing, the first thing the customer might have noticed was the size
and format of the volume: seventy-one and a half pliegos or folded
sheets, making 12+274 folios or 24+548 pages; that is, not far short
of the length of the 1605 Don Quixote. And, allowing for inflation, the
price was just about the same: eight reales and fourteen maravedís
(about £25 or $30 at today’s prices). Author and publisher were clearly
trying to create some sense of equivalence between this new work and
the established best-seller.
The next feature to catch the customer’s attention might have been
the extent of the preliminaries. Lengthy even by seventeenth-century
standards, they take up the first twenty-four pages: title, contents,
errata, certificate of retail price control, four statements of approval by
censors, royal warrants to publish in both Castile and Aragon,
Cervantes’s prologue to the reader, a formal dedication to the Conde de
Lemos, and four endorsements in verse by friends and supporters. Some
of these were statutory requirements, others were optional extras. But
they were all designed to impress and reassure.
The paratexts make clear that the Novelas ejemplares had been in
preparation for well over a year. The four ecclesiastical approvals were
issued in July and August 1612 and the ‘privilege’ or licence to print in
Castile is dated November of the same year. But Robles clearly wanted
a licence for Aragon as well, in order to minimise the likelihood of
pirate editions, and this was not granted until August 1613.3 Cervantes
himself may have contributed to the delay by trying to drive a hard
bargain over the sale of the rights. He and Robles eventually settled at
1,600 reales plus 24 free copies, which is almost certainly a much
better deal than he got for Don Quixote, Part I.4
Most striking of all will be the title page itself (see Figure 11.1).
Figure 11.1 Miguel de Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares (Madrid; Francisco de
Robles, 1613), title page.
Source: Internet archive.
The wording of the title (‘Exemplary Novels by Miguel de Cervantes
Saavedra’) is confident and takes Cervantes’s reputation for granted:
Don Quixote had sold well, had been reprinted several times, and
Madrid was a small but powerful cultural hub that made it possible for
a successful author to build a reputation. The dedicatee was also well
known: the Count of Lemos, who had recently been appointed Viceroy,
Governor, and Captain General of Naples. Cervantes had travelled to
Barcelona in 1610 to be present at the Count’s departure for his new
posting and had entertained hopes of accompanying him in service in
Italy. Cervantes will have more to say about him in the prologue.
The engraved emblem of a hooded hawk and the motto Post tenebras
spero lucem [I hope for light after darkness] was the same as had been
used for the 1605 Don Quixote and would be used again for the second
part in 1615, and for Persiles y Sigismunda in 1617. The imprint was
that of Juan de la Cuesta, one of the best print shops in Madrid and
often used by Robles, although Cuesta himself had left the firm in
1607. As to Robles, we have already seen that Cervantes ‘could have
had no better publisher’.5 He had inherited the shop—through his
mother’s side of the family—from another great publisher and
bookseller, Juan de Medina, and had built it up to become one of the
best-capitalized operations in an otherwise under-capitalized industry.6
As far as the front page is concerned, everything points to a solid,
reliable, dependable product with satisfaction guaranteed.
But what about that title—Novelas ejemplares—what does that mean?
Turn the page and the table of contents shows twelve novels (see
Figure 11.2).
Figure 11.2 Miguel de Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares (Madrid; Francisco de
Robles, 1613), fol. 2r, contents page.
Source: Internet archive. Author’s translations.
There are many intriguing titles here, with a tendency towards
oxymoron: a generous lover? An English Spanish girl? An illustrious
kitchen-maid? And a novel about two dogs?7 But one title in particular
might have caught the attention of a dedicated and assiduous reader of
Don Quixote, Part I: Rinconete y Cortadillo. In Chapter 32 of Don Quixote,
the innkeeper Juan Palomeque investigates the contents of a suitcase
left behind by a previous guest at the inn. Inside, there are three
printed books and a manuscript of a ‘novela’ called El curioso
impertinente. The customers at the inn ask the priest to read it to them,
and the reading takes up virtually the whole of the next three chapters
of the host novel. Cervantes has simply inserted a completely different
novel into his main narrative and forced the reader of Don Quixote to sit
there with the rest of the clientele and listen while the priest reads out
the whole thing, all sixteen and a half thousand words of it, word for
word. This is one of Cervantes’s boldest and most provocative
experiments in narrative architecture, the keystone in the great arch
that keeps Part I aloft.
Much later, in Chapter 47, it turns out that there had, in fact, been
two novels in the mysterious suitcase, the other one being Rinconete y
Cortadillo. That novel remained unread in 1605, but here it is again,
having finally found its way into print in 1613. Why now, and why in
this format?
Part of the answer lies in Cervantes’s relationship to the market,
which is why we have started this chapter by looking at the extrinsic
factors governing the publication of the Novelas ejemplares. Cervantes
spent the last thirty or more years of his life desperately trying to make
ends meet. His military career had ended to all intents and purposes at
the battle of Lepanto in 1571, when the Holy League under Don John
of Austria defeated the Turkish fleet and Cervantes sustained a gunshot
wound that left him permanently unable to use his left hand. Cervantes
was very proud of this wound, ‘cobrado en la más memorable y alta
ocasión que vieron los pasados siglos’ [‘collected…in the greatest and
most memorable event that past centuries have ever seen’].8 But it
rendered the business of making a living doubly difficult.
And there was worse to come. On returning to Spain from further,
less conspicuous service in 1575, he was captured by corsairs and
imprisoned for more than five years in Algiers. Curiously, he makes no
mention of this episode in his short biography in the prologue to the
Novelas ejemplares, although he turned some of it into fiction in the
Captive’s Tale in Don Quixote I.39–41 and revisited the theme of
captivity and redemption several times in the Novelas ejemplares
themselves.
At the age of 33, then, this much travelled old soldier found himself
back home in Spain, a war veteran without a pension, with no visible
means of support and, as soon became apparent, unable to hold down a
regular job without falling foul of the authorities and spending more
time in jail. His first literary venture, a pastoral novel called La Galatea,
appeared in 1585. Cervantes later wrote disparagingly, in the scrutiny
of Don Quixote’s library, that it was all proposition and no conclusion:
‘propone algo, y no concluye nada’.9 The reading public saw no reason
to disagree with him. It was not published again in Spain in his
lifetime, and the second part—which he was still promising, over thirty
years later, in the dedication of Persiles y Sigismunda—never appeared,
if, indeed, it was ever written.
Nevertheless, Cervantes evidently had a strong sense that there was
a living to be made from writing, if he could only find the right
formula. There is considerable evidence that he was already
experimenting with a new literary form that he was to make his own,
the long short story or novela—what in English we would now call,
somewhat confusingly in this context, a ‘novella’.10 The Spanish word
novela was not much used in the sixteenth century to describe a work of
prose fiction. When it was, it generally referred to a narrative form
made popular by a succession of Italian writers, of whom the best
known is Giovanni Boccaccio. His collection of 100 tales, Il Decamerone
(c.1348–53), appeared in five editions in Spanish before it was placed
on the Index of Prohibited Books in 1559. Collections of short stories
by several sixteenth-century Italian writers were also published in
Spanish, including: Giovanni Francesco Straparola, Le piacevole notti
[Pleasant Nights], 1550–3 (Zaragoza, 1578 and six further editions by
1598); Matteo Bandello, Novelle, 1554–73 (Salamanca, 1589) and
Giovanni Battista Giraldi Cinthio, Hecatommithi, 1565 (Toledo, 1590).
These collections of short stories were sometimes little more than
anecdotes, often bawdy or salacious in character, and loosely
assembled within some form of frame. The Decameron is perhaps the
best-known example of the genre, where the frame is provided by an
outbreak of plague in Florence. Seven young women and three young
men, all of whom have been evacuated from the city to a country
retreat, pass the time by telling each other 100 tales in ten days.
The Arabic equivalent, One Thousand and One Nights (often called
the Arabian Nights) in which the virgin queen Scheherazade tells a
succession of unfinished tales night after night, could well have been
known to Cervantes, either directly during his period of imprisonment
in Algiers, or indirectly through any number of medieval Spanish
intermediaries.
Such collections of short stories were much translated or imitated in
sixteenth-century Spain, from Juan de Timoneda’s El Patrañuelo [The
Hoaxer] (Valencia, 1567) to re-editions of medieval wisdom literature,
notably El Conde Lucanor [Count Lucanor] (Seville, 1575) by Don Juan
Manuel, written c.1330–5. The widespread popularity of these short
narratives throughout Europe is attested by the fact that many of them
found their way onto the English stage through the work of
Shakespeare and his contemporaries.
Given Cervantes’s need to earn a living, and his ambition to do so
from writing, the popularity of the Italian short story had a lot to
recommend it. But he was clearly aiming to write at greater length than
the Italians (his novelas are anything up to 15,000 to 20,000 words
long)11 and with greater complexity; to be more original and
sophisticated; to create a form of fiction with literary aspirations,
something that would challenge his readers and make them think.
Cervantes’s claim in the prologue to be the first to write novels in
Spanish (‘yo soy el primero que he novelado en lengua castellana’) is
more than justified, not just on grounds of originality, but also for the
skilful blend of entertainment and literary sophistication they offer.
Whereas other Spanish collections of novelas are imitated or
plagiarised, these are all his own work (‘éstas son mías propias, no
imitadas ni hurtadas’).12 And while other novelas are often little more
than bawdy anecdotes, these novels offer the most wholesome
entertainment, that is, entertainment that our book-buyer could allow
his wife—or even his servants—to read. Several of the paratexts refer to
the collection as Novelas ejemplares de honestísimo entretenimiento
[Exemplary Novels of the Most Wholesome Entertainment],13 suggesting
that this had been Cervantes’s, or Robles’s, original choice of title.
Whether this longer form was dropped for reasons of brevity, economy,
more positive marketing, or to avoid the charge of over-protesting, can
only be surmised. But what is clear is that the title Cervantes eventually
settled on would have struck most contemporary readers and book-
buyers as an intriguing contradiction in terms.
We can be reasonably certain that Cervantes had written at least six
novelas of this type before 1605. As we have seen, El curioso impertinente
was inserted wholesale into Don Quixote, Part I, and Rinconete y
Cortadillo might have been, if the innkeeper had pulled that manuscript
out of the mystery suitcase first. But we also have an independent
sighting of Rinconete y Cortadillo from another manuscript, compiled by
Francisco Porras de la Cámara for Cardinal Fernando Niño de Guevara
in or about 1604.
This source, known as the Porras manuscript, also contained two
other novelas, one of which—El celoso extremeño—was subsequently
included in the Novelas ejemplares, and the other of which—La tía
fingida—is generally attributed to Cervantes but was not included in the
1613 collection. The Porras manuscript was destroyed in 1823, but not
before its contents were transcribed, and comparison of the 1604 and
1613 versions shows that Cervantes revised his earlier work, in places
quite extensively, before it was published.
Then there is the further interpolated novela, El capitán cautivo,
mentioned earlier. And finally, there is the original short story, itself
possibly based on an anonymous short play, which is thought to have
formed the basis of Don Quixote’s first sally, before the introduction of
Sancho Panza.14 What is interesting about these six pre-1605 short
novels is that between them they exemplify many of the characteristics
of the 1613 Novelas ejemplares, particularly Cervantes’s fondness for
working in a wide variety of genres in different combinations.
But there were undoubtedly many more examples of this type: there
are four self-contained stories interpolated into La Galatea and several
other shorter episodes; there are similar episodes interpolated into both
parts of Don Quixote (especially Cardenio’s story, I.23–36); there are the
‘thirteen exemplary novels’ embedded into Persiles y Sigimunda;15 and
there are the remaining ten stories from the Novelas ejemplares. Viewed
from this perspective, it soon becomes apparent that the novela is one
of the basic building blocks of all Cervantes’s fiction in prose.
Cervantes might well have taken his new format to market much
earlier had it not been for the publication in 1599 of the first part of
Guzmán de Alfarache by Mateo Alemán, a converso from Seville,
government official, and frequent inmate of the debtors’ prison. His
novel about corruption in the criminal underworld would consolidate
the genre of the picaresque and change Spanish fiction beyond
recognition. Loosely based on its precursor, La vida de Lazarillo de
Tormes (1554), Alemán’s version of the picaresque is much darker in
tone, more cynical in attitude, yet, ostensibly, with a strong moral
purpose.
A loner from the underclass, living off his wits, Guzmán staggers
from one life crisis to another, winning some but losing many more. His
career ends as a galley slave, and from the galley he writes his
autobiography, an interior dialogue between his younger, foolish self
(Guzmanillo) and his older, wiser, repentant self (Guzmán). That
structure, pioneered by the anonymous Lazarillo and crystallized by
Alemán, was to become the very definition of the Spanish picaresque.
Guzmán de Alfarache was the biggest publishing success of its time,
with sixteen editions in five years.16 A spurious continuation, written
by a Valencian lawyer, Juan Martí, and published under the
pseudonym Mateo Luján de Sayavedra, appeared in 1602 before
Alemán could bring out his own second part in 1604.
The popularity of Guzmán de Alfarache was a major stimulus to the
writing of Don Quixote and to Cervantes’s subsequent literary career.17
Cervantes was a very competitive man: he took proper pride in his own
ability but never felt he got the recognition he deserved. He had
published nothing in prose since La Galatea some fifteen years earlier
and his alternative career as a playwright had been frustrated by the
popular appeal of Lope de Vega. So the publishing success of Guzmán
de Alfarache was both a challenge and an opportunity. How could, how
should, Cervantes respond?
There were aspects of Guzmán de Alfarache that clearly did not
appeal to him, and the picaresque in its ‘pure’ form was the only
popular genre to which Cervantes never did turn his hand. He preferred
to use singleton characters in heroic or romance contexts, and when
working with anti-heroic material he would generally use two
protagonists rather than one (Carriazo and Avendaño, Rinconete and
Cortadillo, Don Quixote and Sancho). The former approach was better
suited to third-person narrative, while the latter lent itself more
obviously to comic dialogue, from which Cervantes created his own
form of picaresque ‘lite’. Cervantes never adopts the classic,
introspective, picaresque interior dialogue, though there are some
passages of interior monologue in I.2, when Don Quixote has no one to
talk to other than himself. Most significantly, Cervantes clearly did not
care for the corrupt lifestyle of the pícaro or share Alemán’s very bleak
view of the world: only El coloquio de los perros comes close, and even
then Cervantes wraps the cynicism in a multi-layered blanket of playful
irony. This is, after all, a dog’s-eye view of the world.
But there were other aspects of Guzmán de Alfarache, apart from its
sheer popularity, that obviously did appeal to Cervantes. It was a long
book, at least as long as many of the books of chivalry that had
dominated the leisure market in the sixteenth century, but it was
episodic rather than ‘interlaced’.18 The episodic structure of Guzmán de
Alfarache 
reflects 
the 
protagonist’s 
constant 
flight 
from 
one
entanglement to another, but it also allows Alemán to insert long quasi-
novelistic episodes into the main narrative in the interests of variety. In
so doing, Alemán was channelling the latest neo-Aristotelian literary
theory, championed in Spain by Alonso López Pinciano in his
Philosophía antigua poética (1596).19
If Cervantes had looked to see what he had in his bottom drawer
and how he could hitch it to Alemán’s bandwagon, the answer could
easily have been a novela about an impoverished hidalgo: a singleton
protagonist (Sancho has not yet been invented), a socially and
financially dysfunctional member of the gentry, unmarried and without
children; someone who fails to husband his land and his assets
productively and who develops a propensity to wander. The early
exploits of Alonso Quijano, with its gentle satire on anachronistic
conduct fuelled by uncritical reading, would not have been such an odd
card to play in the circumstances. Add in Sancho—after a careful re-
reading of what the innkeeper says about the need for a squire in I.3—
and Cervantes would have a formula that could run and run. Part I did
not quite achieve the commercial success of Guzmán de Alfarache, but
seven editions by 1608 helped to establish the knight and his squire in
the popular imagination and translations into several European
languages soon followed. What is more, Part I did sufficiently well to
pose the perennial question faced by any successful writer: what to do
for an encore?
As we have already noted, Cervantes published nothing between
Part I in 1605 and the Novelas ejemplares in 1613, a gap of eight
years,20 so he cannot be accused of being in a rush. He clearly had
difficulty in deciding what to write next or in getting down to the task
of actually writing it. One possible explanation—borne out by the
evidence of the so-called ‘late flowering’ of the years 1613 to 1616—is
that he had too many options, all of which he tried to tackle in tandem
rather than one at a time. Broadly speaking, there were at least three
things he could do next:
a) He could write a sequel to Don Quixote, which he eventually
did, and which Francisco de Robles published in 1615, but not
before Alonso Fernández de Avellaneda pre-empted him with an
apocryphal second part in 1614.
b) He could use the success of Don Quixote as a way of promoting
some of his other work, particularly his plays, which he thought
had never received the attention they deserved due to the greater
popularity of Lope de Vega. This he also did, by bringing out the
Ocho comedias y ocho entremeses in 1615.
c) He could finish his great prose romance, Persiles y Sigismunda,
the book that he intended to be his masterpiece—the book that
dared to compete with Heliodorus and which he had been
working on for several years.21 This he also did, just in time, a
few days before he died in 1616; it was published posthumously,
though not by Robles, the following year.
But each of these would take time. Cervantes was evidently a slow
writer: as late as 1613, in the prologue to the Novelas ejemplares, he
would still be announcing the imminent arrival of the second part of
Don Quixote, and of Persiles y Sigismunda, in a desperate attempt to
forestall imitators and manage readers’ expectations. So maybe there
was a quicker option, one that would allow him to capitalise on his
new-found reputation and make use of material that he had already
written:
d) Bring out a collection of shorter novels like Rinconete y
Cortadillo, the ghost novela that never made it into the text of Don
Quixote.
This option had much to commend it in both practical and literary
terms. In spite of its success, Part I was not without its critics. In II.3,
Sansón Carrasco reports adverse comments on the inclusion of El
curioso impertinente, ‘no por mala, ni por mal razonada, sino por no ser
de aquel lugar, ni tiene que ver con la historia de su merced del señor
don Quijote’ [‘not that it’s a bad one, or badly told, but it’s out of place
and has nothing to do with the history of the great Don Quixote’].22
Cervantes expanded on the implications of this remark in II.44,
when he reports that Cide Hamete Benengeli had regretted embarking
on the history of Don Quixote because it is so dry and one-dimensional
(‘tan seca y tan limitada’);23 it did not give him the chance to branch
out into weightier and more entertaining episodes (‘otras digresiones y
episodios más graves y más entretenidos’)24 as he had done in the first
part with El curioso impertinente and El capitán cautivo. These digressions
relieved him, he says, of the insufferable task (‘trabajo incomportable’)
of having to write about a single subject in the voices of very few
characters (‘escribir de un solo sujeto y hablar por las bocas de pocas
personas’).
What is more, he feared that his readers might give more attention
to the exploits of Don Quixote than to the novels themselves, which
they might skip, and not appreciate their elegance and artistry, which
would be more apparent if they were published separately (‘pasarían
por ellas…sin advertir la gala y artificio que en sí contienen, el cual se
mostrara bien al descubierto, cuando por sí solas…salieran a luz’).25
This is scarcely a Spanish artist’s reply to just criticism. Rather,
Cervantes seems unrepentant in support of his original remarks in I.28
concerning the merits of the novela: that the stories and episodes are no
less agreeable, well-written, and true than the history itself (‘los
cuentos y episodios…que en parte no son menos agradables y
artificiosos y verdaderos que la misma historia’).26
Cervantes’s response in the second part, therefore, hovers between
irony and insolence: he will not include self-contained novels but only
include episodes that have the appearance of novels (‘en esta segunda
parte no quiso injerir novelas sueltas ni pegadizas, sino algunos
episodios que lo pareciesen’).27 But the second part is just as episodic as
the first, if not more so. He may have made the joins less visible but
he’ll be damned if he’ll allow others to dictate what he writes and how
he writes it.28
A separate collection of short novels like the El curioso impertiente,
therefore, offered a number of advantages. Firstly, it would free him
from the requirement to provide a frame, relieve him from the ‘dry
constraints’ of a single narrative thread, and open up a world of many
voices. Novels like Rinconete y Cortadillo pointed the way to a new type
of fiction: short novels that can stand alone without the need for a
larger frame-story in which they have to be set. Even so, Cervantes did
not wish the absence of a frame to go unremarked: the last novela, El
coloquio de los perros, is embedded into the previous one, El casamiento
engañoso, providing just enough framing here to draw attention to its
absence elsewhere.
Secondly, the absence of a frame allowed Cervantes to explore the
widest possible range of genres, geographical settings, social classes,
and plot types, and to mix and match the most popular genres,
providing an extraordinary degree of variety within the collection. No
novel in the collection is quite like any of the others. While Don
Quixote, Part I takes place in a few square miles of La Mancha, the
geographical settings of the Novelas ejemplares range from the Aegean
to the Caribbean and from Britain to North Africa. The characters are
drawn from an equally broad social spectrum, from the new, affluent
nobility to self-made merchants, criminals, confidence tricksters,
dominant women, and excluded minorities. Contemporary political and
social conflicts feature extensively in the foreground as well as the
background and several of the novels are set in the major cities of
Spain and the rest of Europe.
Finally, with the possible exception of the picaresque, none of the
principal fictional genres of Cervantes’s time is missing from this well-
stocked anthology of popular literary types designed to appeal to a
well-read, metropolitan audience. Setting the stories free in this way
allowed Cervantes to demonstrate his gala y artificio, to concentrate on
the formal and technical challenges and opportunities provided by a
tight, focused narrative structure with a beginning, a middle, and an
end—although not always in that order.
Exactly how many of the Novelas ejemplares were already in
Cervantes’s bottom drawer in 1605 is not clear and much critical effort
has been expended on attempting to establish the order in which they
were written. Aside from the inherent interest of the question, a
reliable order of composition could give a clue to what Cervantes was
trying to achieve by adding the later novels to ‘complete’ the
‘collection’.
Sadly, the facts of the matter are far from clear, and there is no
consensus other than that we are unlikely ever to know for certain.
Approaches to solving the puzzle have largely been based on extrinsic
factors, internal evidence,29 or—largely untenable—assumptions about
Cervantes’s changing preferences for certain genre types. Early
twentieth-century critics, reflecting the prevailing tastes of the
nineteenth century, thought in terms of an ‘evolution’ from romance
towards a form of realism they saw as characteristic of the novel.30 This
approach explains the virtual disappearance of Cervantes’s prose epic
Persiles y Sigismunda from the canon of his works at that time.
In 1974, Ruth El Saffar turned this paradigm on its head in a book
entitled Novel to Romance, reversing the direction of travel and
rehabilitating romance as a major feature of Cervantes’s fiction in
prose. A subsequent extremely influential essay by E.C. Riley
(‘Cervantes: A Question of Genre’) argued that one of the distinctive
features of Cervantes’s work is the way he mixes romance and realism,
embedding romance features into recognisably real-world situations
and locations. This approach, which captured the essence of Cervantes’s
aesthetic more convincingly than any previous attempt, also had the
effect of ruling out genre-based approaches to the chronology of the
Novelas ejemplares.
The most systematic recent assessment of the chronology of the
Novelas ejemplares has been made by Jorge García López.31 His
taxonomy produces four broad groups:
a) Novels that probably pre-date Don Quixote, Part I, the Porras
manuscript, and Guzmán de Alfarache (i.e. before 1599), at least
in their original versions: El amante liberal and La española
inglesa.
b) Those that are included in the Porras manuscript or are
contemporary with Don Quixote, Part I, but post-date Guzmán de
Alfarache (1600–4) and were subsequently revised: Rinconete y
Cortadillo, El celoso extremeño.32
c) Novels that presuppose that the Court was still in Valladolid or
which retain references to Valladolid (1601–6): El licenciado
Vidriera, El coloquio de los perros, El casamiento engañoso, and La
gitanilla.
d) A group from around 1608–10 that most closely resemble the
Italian models and may have been included as ‘fillers’: La ilustre
fregona, Las dos doncellas, La fuerza de la sangre, and La señora
Cornelia.
The most striking conclusion from this summary is that, significantly,
the majority of the novels had been written, at least in early drafts, by
1605 or very shortly afterwards.33 It seems clear that, several years
before they were eventually published, Cervantes was already thinking
about how to showcase this new form of fiction that had few if any
precedents in European literature. This was a logical next step for a
talented and ambitious writer who was keen to build on his new-found
literary celebrity and who had some great stories to tell.
Whatever the order in which the novels were written and revised,
that chronology is clearly not reflected in the order in which they
appear in the published volume; which prompts the question, what is
the rationale for that order? In what sense are the Novelas ejemplares a
collection, a set, or a cycle? Is there any unifying structure, thread, or
overall design, and if so, what?
Cervantes himself suggests at least two features that the novels have
in common. The first clue is in the title: ‘Heles dado nombre de
ejemplares, y si bien lo miras, no hay ninguna de quien no se pueda
sacar algún ejemplo provechoso; y si no fuera por no alargar este
sujeto, quizá te mostrara el sabroso y honesto fruto que se podría sacar,
así de todas juntas, como de cada una de por sí’ [‘I have called them
Exemplary, and if you look closely, you will see that there is not one
from which you cannot extract some profitable example; and if it were
not for the fact that it would make this over-long, perhaps I would
show you the delicious and wholesome fruit which could be pulled
both from the collection as a whole and from each one alone’].34
Cervantes’s suggestion that there is a moral to be drawn from each
novel and from the collection as a whole (‘así de todas juntas’) creates a
powerful unifying theme for the collection but not one that stands up to
close scrutiny—at least, not in any conventional sense. Given the
prevalence of sex and violence in the collection and the fact that many
of the plots turn on a murder, rape, or abduction, his insistence that
they are not just harmless (‘honestísimo entretenimiento’) but
exemplary leaves him open to the charge that he is being disingenuous.
What is more, as with the frame, the occasional banal gesture towards
a medieval fabliau (‘and the moral of the story is…’) only serves to
underline the absence of similar conclusions elsewhere. Two lines of
Petrarch at the end of El casamiento engañoso do not make a ‘delicious
and wholesome fruit’, nor does the claim at the end of La española
inglesa that the story shows what beauty and virtue can achieve in the
face of adverse fortune; such a conclusion, if meant without irony,
would be an insult to the reader’s intelligence.
In this case, as in many others, Cervantes’s prologue is more
problematic than it makes out. It provides a fitting introduction to a
thought-provoking collection of novels, and it sets the agenda for an
intelligent discussion of them. But it should not be taken at face value.
Like the stories themselves, the prologue is ambivalent, cryptic, and
laden with Cervantes’s characteristic irony. By inviting the reader to
look for profitable examples that are not explicit, or by providing banal
conclusions that fly in the face of common sense and experience,
Cervantes is underlining the way in which the lesson has to be learned
by dint of careful consideration and close reading. Even then, the
lessons will be complex and often inconclusive: human nature—and
divine providence—are complex matters which do not lend themselves
readily to clear-cut judgments.
The exemplarity of the Novelas ejemplares is not, therefore, the kind
that can be stuck onto the end of the story as an afterthought; it is
woven into the fabric of the novel and depends both on how the tale is
told and—just as important—how it is read. Cervantes himself is
usually relatively noncommittal towards his material; in some of the
stories (Rinconete y Cortadillo, El licenciado Vidriera, and El coloquio de
los perros) he is overtly satirical, although in the latter two cases the
majority of the satire is delegated to a potentially unreliable
mouthpiece: a man who thinks he is made of glass and a dog,
respectively. But for the most part, Cervantes simply states the facts
and leaves the reader to draw conclusions. The quest for profit is part
of the pleasure. In this way, it is perhaps better to think of the Novelas
ejemplares as providing ‘samples’ rather than examples to be followed
or avoided: ‘samples’ that illustrate the complexity of life and human
nature and show how people are apt to behave in particular
circumstances. As a noun, the word ejemplar in Spanish can mean
precisely that: a copy of a book, one instance of many, or a part that
stands for the whole.
But what are we to make of the many ‘samples’ of circumstances and
events that manifestly do not happen in real life, when the example
contradicts our everyday experience? What lessons are to be drawn
from these? A good proportion of the collection is either drawn from or
shares significant characteristics with romance,35 that is, the novels
deal with the imaginary, exotic, or counter-factual. Four in particular
(La gitanilla, La española inglesa, La ilustre fregona, and La fuerza de la
sangre)36 tell the story of a heroine who is redeemed from the
consequences of a criminal or immoral act: Preciosa is stolen by a
gypsy as a baby and brought up as a gypsy; Isabel is abducted by the
English during a raid on Cadiz and is brought up in the English court;
Costanza is the product of an illicit union in which her mother is raped,
and is brought up by an innkeeper and his wife; and Leocadia is the
victim of a vicious rape that renders her unmarriageable and therefore
socially null and void.
None of these crimes is unthinkable—far from it: child theft,
abduction, and rape were all too frequent then as now—and abduction,
captivity, and redemption were central to Cervantes’s own experience
in the years 1575–80. Capture by Barbary pirates and imprisonment in
Algiers was clearly a life-changing experience for him. He made four
unsuccessful escape attempts and was eventually redeemed by payment
of a large ransom. On his release and return to Spain, the authorities
debriefed him to ensure that he had not been ‘turned’ while in prison,
and he made a written deposition. He subsequently reworked the
experience of these five years into two short novels and a number of
plays.37
Because Cervantes turned so much of his life into art it is sometimes
difficult to determine which is which. But it seems clear that he uses
the misfortunes of these four women in particular as test cases to
examine various ways in which the truth of their circumstances comes
to light. The crimes at the heart of these four novels are not solved by
rational detection but by a series of events that seem designed to cause
astonishment and to test the reader’s credulity almost to breaking
point. All four women are young, beautiful, virtuous, and of high social
rank, and they all bring about their own rescue by displaying
outstanding personal qualities in overwhelmingly hostile environments.
They are all exceptional women, and their beauty and their virtue
attract and inspire the four men who will restore them to their rightful
place, geographically, politically, and/or socially.38 In Leocadia’s case,
she is redeemed by the rapist himself, and the reader is asked to believe
that he will subsequently fall in love with and marry her, thereby
restoring the honour that he had so brutally taken from her many years
before.
These four novels and the value systems on which they are based
pose a number of difficult questions to any reader in search of a
profitable example. No one could reasonably conclude that Cervantes is
arguing that virtue is linked to high birth, youth, or physical beauty, or
that he is suggesting that integrity and truth to self will inevitably be
rewarded. The reader’s own experience will tell her that, in these
unlikely circumstances, social conditioning would overcome innate
virtue, as the example of the pícaro appears to demonstrate. But
Cervantes goes to great lengths to show that his heroes and heroines
are by definition exceptional. Preciosa (La gitanilla) is the most
strikingly beautiful, outstandingly gifted, witty, intelligent, fair-
skinned, blonde-haired gypsy that Andrés or anyone else has ever seen.
So why do so many readers cry ‘foul’ when (spoiler alert!) she turns out
not to be a gypsy after all?
Stories of this type force us to ask why we find it so difficult to
believe when a character is honest and trustworthy, says what he
means, means what he says, and does what he says he will. Ricaredo
(La española inglesa) is an exceptional, even extreme, case in point: he
says he loves Isabel for who she is, not for her beauty; when she falls ill
and loses her good looks he tells her he loves her even more; when he
is forced to flee the country he promises they will be reunited in two
years’ time. And when the time comes he is true to his word. What is so
astonishing about that? Well, it is astonishing, and intentionally so.
Cervantes espoused the aesthetic of admiratio throughout his career,
judging with good reason that readers of fiction expect their horizons
to be stretched beyond the confines of everyday experience. In this
case, the exceptional Ricaredo is the exception that proves the rule, and
if the reader finds it difficult to believe that men do not always behave
badly, she must clearly ask herself why.
In these more heroic novels, Cervantes provides striking,
provocative, and often far-fetched working models of the kind of
idealism to which the world pays lip-service but finds it hard to accept
in practice. The exemplarity of each novel, and of the collection as a
whole, lies in the way they provoke thought and invite judgment about
serious issues of moral conduct which may appear escapist but are not
nearly so distant from our experience as we may think.
A second feature that the Novelas ejemplares have in common is
‘hidden mystery’. Towards the end of his prologue, Cervantes writes
that since he has been bold enough to dedicate these novels to the
Count of Lemos, they must contain some hidden mystery that elevates
them to that level (‘algún misterio tienen escondido que las levanta’).39
At the heart of this statement lies a pun on the word ‘elevate’, a
reference to the moment when the priest elevates the host during the
mass, but it is also a slightly self-mocking statement about the merit of
the collection and its suitability to be dedicated to such a lofty patron.
The claim that the novels (plural) contain a hidden mystery
(singular) is one of the most intriguing aspects of the prologue and the
collection as a whole. There are at least three meanings to the word
‘mystery’ that Cervantes could have in mind. Firstly, as we have just
seen, several of the novels have at their centre a concealed truth, and
the writer’s task is to reveal it as the novel unfolds.40 In some cases, the
nature of the crime and the perpetrator are known to the reader from
the outset, and the intrigue lies in the way the hidden mystery is
brought to light. In the case of Preciosa in La gitanilla, there are so
many hints dropped in the first paragraph that any reader’s suspicions
should immediately be aroused. Perhaps only Costanza’s origins in La
ilustre fregona are completely shrouded in mystery, but her beauty and
demeanour in context clearly mark her out as someone who is not who
she appears to be.
The second meaning is a more sacramental variant of the first. The
original magnum mysterium was referred to by St Paul in his first letter
to the Corinthians: ‘Behold I show you a mystery…the dead shall be
raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed.’ (I Cor 15:51). This is a
mystery in the sense that it lies beyond the range of human
understanding, but it is also, for a Christian, a profound truth. This
relationship between something which is unknown (hidden from view)
and something which demands to be made known (revealed) has its
counterpart in the tension that exists in all narratives between
concealment and revelation. The story-teller’s job is to tell the audience
what they need to know but not tell them—yet—what they desperately
want to know.
The way this tension is maintained brings us to a third meaning of
mystery, one that derives etymologically from the Latin word
‘ministerium’, meaning ‘occupation, work, or labour’. This is the
meaning that lies behind the English ‘mystery plays’, so-called because
they were performed by members of the medieval guilds. The guilds
were responsible for regulating the crafts and trades by training
apprentices and issuing licences to freemen allowing them to make
their living.
‘Mystery’ therefore has both a sacramental and a secular meaning,
and Cervantes runs these two senses in parallel in very interesting
ways. He understands mystery as both hidden truth and the mystery of
skill, of craft. Cervantes’s crime novels do not have a detective, a
rational mind whose observational and deductive powers can defeat the
evil of the criminal mind. The battle between good and evil in
Cervantes’s work is managed by the writer’s consummate handling of
plot. In Cervantes’s mind, the revelation of hidden truths, the
progression from evil to good, from chaos to order, is unstoppable. The
writer’s job is to order the events so as to ensure that truth is born into
the light of day almost like a force of nature.
This process usually culminates in what classical theorists termed
anagnorisis, a moment of recognition or discovery when different plot
strands intersect to reveal a hidden fact or identity. Unsympathetic
readers often associate this with over-reliance on coincidence. In his
defence, Cervantes might argue that coincidences do happen. During
the preparation of this chapter alone, two girls, one American and one
French, were identified as identical twins, twenty-five years after they
were separated, when a friend of one recognized the other on
television; and an American man tracked down and was reunited with a
twin sister he did not know he had until he saw her name on the back
of a photograph. In May 2014, two American twin sisters were reunited
seventy-eight years after they were separated in Aldershot UK; in
October 2015, two orphaned sisters from South Korea, each adopted by
a different American family, were reunited after they recognized each
other working at the same hospital in Sarasota, Florida; in December
2015, an Argentine man was reunited with his mother thirty-eight
years after being snatched from her in jail; and in February 2016, two
Colombian sisters were reunited thirty years after they were separated
by an avalanche.
The advent of genetics, DNA profiling, and social media have made
such discoveries much more common, but the role of serendipity in
these real-life cases is striking (recognition and family likeness—la
fuerza de la sangre, the coincidence of birthdays, physical tokens such as
the photograph). So too is the persistence of human desperation—in
August 2016, a South African woman was convicted of snatching a
baby nineteen years earlier from the Groote Schuur hospital in Cape
Town. The truth came to light when the girl’s younger sister noticed
the family resemblance at her school.
The question is: how and why do these cases of anagnorisis come
about? For a Christian such as Cervantes they are examples of divine
providence, the working out of a pattern that is beyond the scope of
human understanding. Secular societies do not have such beliefs to fall
back on, which might explain why modern readers often resist the neat
closure of the happy ending. But Cervantes is always extremely careful
to prepare his revelations in advance. Like a good crime writer, he
drops clues throughout and makes sure that when the moment of
revelation comes, it is entirely consistent with what we have been told
about the character from the outset. But there are also some instances
of subversion: the ending of La gitanilla, for example, is only partly
happy and far from neat.41 Cervantes gives the appearance of struggling
with the complexities and conventions of plot, like a tightrope walker
who pretends to fall in order to draw attention to his skill.
For the most part, however, there is never any doubt about who is in
control. The Novelas ejemplares are an anthology of writerly skills,
showing different ways of starting and ending a story, different
narrative techniques and points of view, different ways of combining
literary models, plot types, settings, and outcomes. At the heart of the
collection is the writer’s central challenge to himself as well as to the
reader: to extend the boundaries of what is possible in fiction without
stretching the reader’s credulity to breaking point. The key lies in the
balance of wonder (admiratio) and verisimilitude. Cervantes excites the
reader’s amazement by offering a carefully constructed chain of
improbable events, none of which is ever quite beyond the bounds of
possibility. The concatenation of events that delivers Ricaredo to his
appointment with Isabel is a supreme example of this technique. Only
when we look back do we see how far we have been led by the
powerful logic behind the fiction.
This process is most clearly illustrated in the final two stories of the
collection, El casamiento engañoso and El coloquio de los perros. They are
linked thematically and formally because the second story is presented
as having been written (or at least written down) by the protagonist of
the first. Campuzano, the victim of the deceitful marriage, prepares the
ground with a conventional tale of confidence trickery and then
persuades his interlocutor, Peralta, to read an account of a conversation
between two dogs he claims to have overheard while recovering in
hospital from a dose of the pox. Campuzano admits many times that
the story is incredible and, initially, Peralta refuses to believe it. But by
the end of the story, which he reads silently to himself, he has to
concede that, even though it was incredible, it was very entertaining
and very well written.42
Wonder and verisimilitude are also the key to a second main feature
of Cervantes’s literary technique, the mixing of genres. None of the
stories is entirely devoid of the imaginative freedom we associate with
romance, and none—even those with plots which are most obviously
reminiscent of romance—is entirely divorced from the contemporary
world in which they were written. The obstacles faced by Cervantes’s
characters, and the sources of his biting satire, are drawn from the
contemporary world of warfare, class and gender struggles, and
religious, ethnic, and political conflict.43
Fiction rooted to this degree in real time and place was not common
in European literature of Cervantes’s time,44 but it has a double benefit.
Firstly, it ensures that the fiction, however far-fetched, is always
anchored to the real world and is more persuasive as a result. The
abduction and rape at the start of La fuerza de la sangre takes place on a
street in Toledo that many readers would have known first hand,
maybe after having a drink at the inn in which La ilustre fregona is
largely set. The grotesque satire of Monipodio’s gang of thieves and
pickpockets is set in a house in Seville, with a patio like hundreds of
others, furnished with a stool and a plant pot like hundreds of others,
and every twist and turn of La española inglesa has its basis in the
religious, political, and economic struggles of contemporary Europe
and the wars on the high seas.
The second benefit of mixing genres lies in the potential it gives the
writer to highlight the spiritual truth beneath the commonplace
exterior. In this way the exemplarity and the wonderment are made to
work together. In creating a character like Costanza, for example, a
beacon of moral and spiritual probity in a world of decadence and
corruption, Cervantes is doing what his younger contemporary
Velázquez does in pictures like The Drunkards and Vulcan’s Forge:
bringing the mythical world into contact with the real. Like Velázquez,
Cervantes illustrates the beauty and nobility that lies at the heart of the
human condition, and the (occasional and sometimes improbable)
triumph of good over evil. Costanza’s integrity and steadfastness not
only bring about her redemption, but also illuminate the lives of all
those with whom she comes into contact, including the reader’s own.
So, did our visitor to Robles’s bookshop leave with seventy-one and
a half pliegos of Cervantes under his arm and, if so, what did he get for
his eight reales and fourteen maravedís?
If he did make the investment it would have proved very
worthwhile, for the Novelas ejemplares are the greatest achievement of
Spain’s greatest writer at the height of his powers. They are the work of
a consummate professional in all senses of the word. Unlike virtually
every Spanish writer before him, Cervantes wrote to make money. That
fact alone tells us a great deal about the kind of writer he was. To make
ends meet he had to put his readers first, to respond to their changing
tastes while retaining his integrity as a writer and innovator. He tried
to give his readers something they knew and liked, spiced with
something they had never come across before.
Our book-buyer will have taken home with him what was in effect a
travelling library, a comprehensive overview of the most fashionable
types of European fiction, all transformed in a way that would surprise
and delight the most sophisticated audience. The standard features of
high romance are never far away: star-crossed lovers, journeys, ordeals,
reconciliations between long-lost relatives, murder, rape, piracy, and
transvestite disguise. These were the stuff of popular fiction and, in
particular, the theatre, to which many of the Novelas ejemplares bear a
close resemblance. Cervantes also does his best to respond to the
growing popularity of the picaresque, giving him the opportunity to
display his wide knowledge and experience of contemporary Spain,
Italy, and the Muslim world, and the low-life settings that obviously
fascinated the mainly professional and upper-class readership for which
he wrote. And there is even some humanist satire and a couple of
talking dogs.45
All of this was intended to be entertaining; we should not overlook
the significance of the word ‘entretenimiento’ in the longer title that
was eventually dropped before publication in 1613. Cervantes stresses
in his prologue the recreational role of literature, comparing his work
to a game of billiards, and suggesting that excessive attention to work,
and even to serious matters like religion, is not healthy. One of the
censors of the first edition, Fr. Juan Bautista, points out that both
Aristotle and St Thomas Aquinas considered harmless fun to be a
virtue.46
But it had to be harmless. In the Novelas ejemplares Cervantes was
offering his readership a new, more respectable and worthwhile form of
literature which, in spite of the associations of the word ‘novela’, would
not shock or cause offence. Indeed, he backed up his claim by saying
that he would rather cut off the hand with which he wrote them than
have anyone come to harm from reading them. This could be another
typically double-edged remark by Cervantes. In one sense it is no idle
promise, coming from a man who has lost his other hand in battle, but
since it is unclear how a man with only one hand could cut it off, it
may also be a rather empty threat. By calling these novels ‘exemplary’,
and by using a similar oxymoron in several of their titles, Cervantes
was being deliberately provocative, challenging received opinions
about the novela by suggesting that it was capable of greater
seriousness and sophistication than had previously been thought.
As we have seen, the collection is exemplary in another sense: a
showcase for Cervantes’s growing sense of his value as a writer. Much
of the variety we find in the novels in terms of genre, plot, characters,
and setting is mirrored in the many different ways in which Cervantes
chooses to tell the story. No two novels start or end in the same way. La
gitanilla begins with a series of generalizations about gypsies being
thieves before going on to wrong-foot the reader with a story that
reinforces the very prejudice that we expect the opening statement to
challenge. El coloquio de los perros is introduced by an entire novela that
destroys the credibility of the character who claims to have overheard
the two dogs talking. El amante liberal begins in the first person, in
medias res, without a shred of context to enable us to get our bearings.
Rinconete y Cortadillo starts with an omniscient narrator who writes in
both third person singular and first person plural before handing over
to two scruffy-looking protagonists who address each other in an
archaic and mocking register. La española inglesa starts on the high seas,
and El licenciado Vidriera begins under a tree on the banks of the river
Tormes. The first four paragraphs of El celoso extremeño summarize a
man’s entire life and career in a comprehensive overview that pivots on
a single moment of decision that drives the whole of the rest of the
novel.
The claims that Cervantes makes for the originality—and the
mystery—of his collection are far from exaggerated. He always took
proper pride in his achievements, even if he occasionally spoiled the
effect by showing his exasperation at the success of other writers whom
he regarded as less gifted and less serious than he was. In the scrutiny
of Don Quixote’s library in I.6, Cervantes consigns a large part of
European literature to the bonfire before going on to replace it with
something much more original, both amusing and serious, and
profoundly skilful. In the opening chapters of Part II he goes one better.
This time there is only one book worth mentioning—his own first part
—which he then proceeds to improve on in a sequel that outdoes even
the earlier achievement. So confident was Cervantes in his ability as a
writer that in the Novelas ejemplares he offered his readers another
comprehensive overview of contemporary fiction, once again re-worked
and re-presented in new and exciting ways. There was nothing like
them in previous European fiction, and he knew it.
We are unlikely ever to know how serious Cervantes was about the
hidden mystery that he claims lies at the heart of the collection. Is it
like the Figure in the Carpet or the Enigma in the Variations, or simply
a question of whodunnit? Cervantes hardly ever tells us everything, and
certainly never tells us everything we want to know. The novels are full
of worldly wisdom, but he very rarely allows himself to be drawn on
the significance or the legitimacy of what he writes. This might be why
he delegates so much to the protagonists themselves, so that many
voices can be heard.47 A great deal of the impact of the Novelas
ejemplares derives from this dynamic approach to narrative, of which El
coloquio de los perros is, perhaps, the most extreme example. In what
purports to be a transcript of a conversation between two dogs,
Campuzano points out that he has avoided the use of ‘said Cipión’ and
‘replied Berganza’ to save time and space; but by presenting the novel
in the form of a playbook, Cervantes excludes anything that could get
between the reader and the spoken word. The readiness of Cervantes’s
characters to tell their own stories in their own words undoubtedly
derives from his experience as a (not very successful) dramatist; but he
might also have absorbed something of the oral culture of street
entertainment while he was captive in Algiers. The choice of an Arabic
avatar in Don Quixote I.9 and the appearance of two oral story-tellers in
Book III of Persiles y Sigismunda makes one wonder how much of
Cervantes’s work is attributable to a unique fusion of the two cultures
north and south of the Mediterranean.
The Novelas ejemplares are a tour de force of story-telling by one of
the 
world’s 
greatest 
novelists: 
original, 
subtle, 
imaginative,
entertaining, and amusing, to be read for pleasure as well as profit. In
many ways, they are like a gallery hang. All the pictures are by the
same artist, yet they differ in technique and subject matter, medium,
and use of colour. Each is its own piece, in its own frame. But hanging
them together sets up resonances in the viewer’s imagination and
creates linkages and contrasts that constantly provoke new thoughts
and fresh perspectives. They are examples rather than exemplary,
working models of human nature and human behaviour. But ultimately
their ‘hidden mystery’ lies in the eye of the beholder, in the mind of the
reader.
Works Cited
Armas, Frederick A. de. Don Quixote Among the Saracens. A Clash of Civilizations
& Literary Genres (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2011).
Boyd, Stephen. ‘Cervantes’s Exemplary Prologue’. In A Companion to Cervantes’s
Novelas ejemplares, edited by Stephen Boyd (Woodbridge: Tamesis, 2005),
pp. 47–68.
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Don Quijote de la Mancha, edited by Francisco
Rico, 2 vols. (Barcelona: Galaxia Gutenberg/Círculo de Lectores, 2004).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Don Quixote, translated by John Rutherford
(Harmondsworth: Penguin, 2000).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Novelas ejemplares, edited by Jorge García López
(Madrid: Real Academia Española, 2013).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. The Complete Exemplary Novels, edited by Barry
Ife and Jonathan Thacker (Oxford: Oxbow Books, 2013).
Childers, William. Transnational Cervantes (Toronto: University of Toronto Press,
2006).
Clement, Richard W. ‘Francisco de Robles, Cervantes and the Spanish Book
Trade’, Mediterranean Studies 11 (2002), pp. 115–30.
Close, Anthony. Cervantes and the Comic Mind of his Age (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2000).
Cruickshank, D.W. ‘“Literature” and the Book Trade in Golden-Age Spain’.
Modern Language Review 73 (1978): pp. 799–824.
Dunn, Peter N. ‘Las Novelas ejemplares’. In Suma Cervantina, edited by J.B.
Avalle-Arce and E.C. Riley (London: Tamesis, 1973), pp. 81–118.
Egginton, William. The Man Who Invented Fiction. How Cervantes Ushered in the
Modern World (London: Bloomsbury, 2016).
El Saffar, Ruth S. Beyond Fiction. The Recovery of the Feminine in the Novels of
Cervantes (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984).
El Saffar, Ruth S. Novel to Romance. A Study of Cervantes’s Novelas ejemplares
(Baltimore & London: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1974).
Forcione, Alban K. Cervantes and the Humanist Vision: A Study of Four Exemplary
Novels (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1982).
Forcione, Alban K. Cervantes and the Mystery of Lawlessness: A Study of El
casamiento engañoso y El coloquio de los perros (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1984).
Fuchs, Barbara. Exotic Nation. Maurophilia and the Construction of Early Modern
Spain (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2009).
Fuchs, Barbara. Passing for Spain. Cervantes and the Fictions of Identity (Urbana
and Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 2003).
Fuchs, Barbara. Romance (New York and London: Routledge, 2004).
Garcés, María Antonia. Cervantes in Algiers. A Captive’s Tale (Nashville:
Vanderbilt University Press, 2002).
García López, Jorge. Cervantes. La figura en el tapiz (Barcelona: Pasado &
Presente, 2015).
González de Amezúa y Mayo, Agustín. Cervantes creador de la novela corta
española, 2 vols. (Madrid: CSIC, 1956–8).
González Echevarría, Roberto. Love and the Law in Cervantes (New Haven &
London: Yale University Press, 2005).
Ife, B.W. ‘From Stage to Page: Don Quixote as Performance’. In The Art of
Cervantes in Don Quixote: Critical Essays, edited by Stephen Boyd, Trudi
Darby, and Terence O’Reilly (Oxford: Legenda, 2019), pp. 93–118.
Ife, B.W. ‘General Introduction’. In Cervantes. Exemplary Novels, edited by B.W.
Ife (Warminster: Aris and Phillips, 1992), pp. iv–xiv. New edition: Cervantes.
The Complete Exemplary Novels, edited by Barry Ife and Jonathan Thacker
(Oxford: Oxbow Books, 2013), pp. [vii]–xxiii.
Ife, B.W. ‘Miguel and the Detectives: Crimes and their Detection in the Novelas
ejemplares’. Journal of Hispanic Research 2 (1993–4): pp. 355–68.
Ife, B.W. Reading and Fiction in Golden-Age Spain. A Platonist Critique and some
Picaresque Replies (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985).
Ife, B.W. ‘The real and its effect in the Spanish picaresque’. New Comparison 11
(1991): pp. 3–12.
Ife, B.W. and Trudi L. Darby. ‘Remorse, Retribution and Redemption in La
fuerza de la sangre: Spanish and English Perspectives’. In A Companion to
Cervantes’s Novelas ejemplares, edited by Stephen Boyd (Woodbridge:
Tamesis, 2005), pp. 172–90.
Johnson, Carroll B. Cervantes and the Material World (Urbana & Chicago:
University of Illinois Press, 2000).
Lappin, Anthony. ‘Exemplary Rape: The Central Problem of La fuerza de la
sangre’. In A Companion to Cervantes’s Novelas ejemplares, edited by Stephen
Boyd (Woodbridge: Tamesis, 2005), pp. 148–71.
Laspéras, Jean-Michel. ‘La novela corta: hacia una definición’. In La invención de
la novela, edited by Jean Canavaggio (Madrid: Casa de Velázquez, 1999), pp.
307–17.
Rico, Francisco. ‘Sobre la cronología de las novelas de Cervantes’. In ‘Por
discreto y por amigo’. Mélanges offerts à Jean Canavaggio, edited by Ch. Couderc
and B. Pellistrandi (Madrid: Casa de Velázquez, 2005), pp. 159–65.
Riley, E.C. ‘Cervantes: A Question of Genre’. In Medieval and Renaissance Studies
on Spain and Portugal in Honour of P.E. Russell, edited by F.W. Hodcroft
(Oxford: Society for the Study of Medieval Languages and Literature, 1981),
pp. 69–85.
Riley, E.C. Cervantes’s Theory of the Novel (Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1962).
Stagg, Geoffrey. ‘Don Quixote and the Entremés de los romances: A Retrospective’.
Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 22, no. 2 (2002): pp.
129–50.
Stagg, Geoffrey. ‘Revision in Don Quixote Part I’. In Studies in Honour of I.
González Llubera, edited by Frank Pierce (Oxford: Dolphin, 1959), pp. 347–66.
Thompson, Colin. ‘Eutrapelia and Exemplarity in the Novelas ejemplares’. In A
Companion to Cervantes’s Novelas ejemplares, edited by Stephen Boyd
(Woodbridge: Tamesis, 2005), pp. 261–82.
Wilson, Diana de Armas. Allegories of Love. Cervantes’s Persiles y Sigismunda
(Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1991).
1 Clement, p. 115.
2 ‘En fin, pues ya esta ocasión se pasó, y yo he quedado en blanco y sin
figura, será forzoso valerme por mi pico…’ (Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, p.
17). [‘In the event, for that opportunity was lost and I have been left blank and
unillustrated, I shall have to make do with my tongue…’] (Cervantes, The
Complete Exemplary Novels, p. xxxi). All subsequent references are to these
editions. For a comprehensive analysis of Cervantes’s prologue see Boyd and for
a more general overview of the collection see Ife, ‘General Introduction’.
3 Don Quixote, Part I had been printed in Valencia and Lisbon in 1605,
which were not covered by the licence for Castile and hence represented lost
income for Robles. The Novelas ejemplares fared no better, with pirate editions
in Pamplona and Brussels in 1614 and Milan in 1615, and a counterfeit edition,
claiming to be from the press of Juan de la Cuesta in Madrid, but probably
printed in Seville in 1614.
4 García López, in Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, p. 770.
5 Clement, p. 115.
6 Cruickshank, p. 815.
7 Note that Cervantes does not reveal at this stage that Cipión and Berganza
are talking dogs.
8 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, p. 17; p. xxxi.
9 Cervantes, Don Quijote, v. I, p. 94. All subsequent references are to this
edition. The priest goes on to say that they would have to wait for the second
part to see if it got any better.
10 See Laspéras.
11 When Juan Palomeque hands the manuscript of El curioso impertinente to
the priest in Don Quixote, I.32, the narrator notes that it is ‘hasta obra de ocho
pliegos’ (i.e. 16 folios or 32 pages), written in an exceptionally fine hand (‘de
tan buena letra’, p. 410). With characteristic deftness, Cervantes subtly draws
attention to the substantial length of the novela, and implies that the manuscript
has been prepared by a professional copyist, perhaps for presentation to a
patron, for private circulation, or in readiness for publication.
12 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, p. 19.
13 Specifically, the censor’s report by Alonso Jerónimo de Salas Barbadillo
(31 July 1613, p. 8) and the two royal warrants for Castile (22 November 1612,
pp. 9–10) and Aragon (9 August 1613, pp. 11–12), twice in the latter case. The
censor’s report by Fr. Juan Bautista (9 July 1612, pp. 5–6) also uses the phrase
‘entretenimiento honesto’, though not as part of the title but as a definition of
the quality of eutropelia that he discerns in the novels: ‘porque entretienen con
su novedad, enseñan con sus ejemplos a huir vicios y seguir virtudes, y el autor
cumple con su intento, con que da honra a nuestra lengua castellana, y avisa a
las repúblicas de los daños que de algunos vicios se siguen, con otras muchas
comodidades…’ [‘they entertain with their novelty, they teach with their
examples the fleeing of vice and the following of virtue, and the author fulfils
his intention, honouring our Spanish language and warning nations of the harm
that stems from some vices, with many other benefits…’] (p. xxv). The range of
dates for these paratexts suggests that the longer version of the title was still in
play until shortly before publication.
14 The view that Don Quixote’s first sally derives from a novela or an entremés
is traditional, and has been contested, but the arguments were reviewed and
crystallized in Stagg, ‘Revision’ and ‘Retrospective’. The first six chapters make
a coherent whole, are the right length, have a strong focus on a single sally and
a clear, exemplary theme, to undermine the authority of books of chivalry and
their influence on the minds of common people: ‘deshacer la autoridad y cabida
que en el mundo y en el vulgo tienen los libros de caballerías’ (p. 19). What is
more, the earlier statement in the prologue that the whole thing is a diatribe
against books of chivalry (‘todo él es una invectiva contra los libros de
caballerías’, p. 18) is true of the first six chapters in a way that is only partly
true of the rest of the novel. The absence of Sancho from the first sally provides
some of the strongest evidence in favour of a pre-existent novela, otherwise,
why not include Sancho from the outset, do away with the short first sally, and
leave out the scrutiny of the books?
15 Wilson, pp. 151–76.
16 Luis de Valdés, writing in a preface to the 1604 second part, claims that
50,000 copies of the first part alone were in circulation, in 26 editions, mostly
pirated. The novel was also a major international success—though that was the
least of Cervantes’s worries—appearing in French in 1600, Italian in 1606,
German in 1615, English in 1622, and Latin in 1623.
17 See Close.
18 The French term ‘entrelacement’ is used to describe the traditional
romance technique of intertwining several narrative strands so that they each
surface in turn to create variety within a single narrative.
19 See Riley, Cervantes’s Theory…, pp. 116–31.
20 Seven, if we take into account the fact that the earliest censors’ reports are
dated July 1612.
21 Heliodorus of Emesa (mid-third century ad) was famed for a Greek
romance called the Aethiopica about the lives of the two lovers Theagenes and
Chariclea. The manuscript was discovered in the sixteenth century, printed in
Basel in 1534, translated into French in 1547, Latin in 1551, English in 1569,
and Spanish, twice, in 1554 and 1587. It was held in high regard by
Renaissance humanist critics who valued it for its exemplarity and
verisimilitude; that is, although it was a work of the imagination, it kept within
the bounds of credibility, unlike many other romances of the period.
22 Cervantes, Don Quijote, p. 710; Don Quixote, p. 506.
23 Cervantes, Don Quijote, p. 1069.
24 Cervantes, Don Quijote, p. 1070.
25 Cervantes, Don Quijote, p. 1070. Cervantes’s use of two imperfect
subjunctives in this passage (‘el cual se mostrara, cuando por sí solas salieran a
luz’) makes the meaning ambiguous: either ‘as would be clear if they were
published separately’ or ‘as would be clear when they are published separately’.
In the latter case, Cervantes could be alluding directly to the publication of the
Novelas ejemplares. If we take the chronology of Part II at face value, Cervantes
had reached Chapter 36 by 20 July 1614, the date of Sancho’s letter to his wife
Teresa. If this passage were written after the publication of the Novelas
ejemplares, the allusion could still be prospective in reported speech: ‘[Cide
Hamete said that] it would be clear when they were published separately’.
26 Cervantes, Don Quijote, p. 347.
27 Cervantes, Don Quijote, p. 1070.
28 Dmitri Shostakovich adopted the same approach when criticized by the
Soviet authorities for failing to compose in a way that was consistent with
socialist realism. His Fifth Symphony (1937) embraced the requirement for
exalted rhetorical optimism to such an extent as to make a mockery of it.
Shostakovich famously described the symphony, ironically, as ‘a Soviet artist’s
creative response to justified criticism’.
29 Internal evidence based on historical events needs careful handling
because comparison of the manuscript and published versions of Rinconete y
Cortadillo and El celoso extremeño shows that Cervantes revised his work
extensively; and because he was quite capable of telescoping or elongating
historical time in the service of literary time, as is apparent from the internal
chronology of Persiles y Sigismunda.
30 See, among others, González de Amezúa y Mayo, vol. I, Chapter 11.
31 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, pp. 726–35 and García López, Cervantes…,
p. 213.
32 La tía fingida would be part of this group if it had been included in the
1613 collection.
33 This conclusion is supported by the overwhelming use in the Novelas
ejemplares of the linguistic formula ‘a lo cual’ rather than ‘a lo que’ which
predominates in Cervantes’s later work (see Rico).
34 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, p. 18; p. xxxiii.
35 Fuchs, Romance, is an excellent introduction and overview, and there is a
useful summary of the main characteristics in Riley, ‘Cervantes…’.
36 El amante liberal also shares some of the characteristics of these four,
though Leonisa is, perhaps, rather less responsible for her own redemption than
the other four heroines. The inclusion of La fuerza de la sangre in this group is
proposed by Ife and Darby, ‘Remorse’. See also Lappin.
37 See Armas, Childers, Fuchs, Exotic Nation…and Passing for Spain…, and
Garcés. The Mediterranean was—and still is—a huge political and religious
divide that runs through Cervantes’s work, and his experience of cultures in
contact extends to a fascination with other kinds of internal boundaries. When
Rinconete and Cortadillo enter the world of Monipodio’s criminal gang they go
through a looking-glass that Lewis Carroll would have been proud of.
38 Remember that it is Zoraida who singles out the captive to be her liberator
in the Captive’s Tale in Don Quixote, I.40.
39 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, p. 20.
40 Forcione, Cervantes and the Mystery of Lawlessness.
41 Ife, ‘Miguel and the Detectives…’. The denouement of La señora Cornelia
shows another side of Cervantes’s rather skittish treatment of the conventions of
plot.
42 Ife, Reading and Fiction…, pp. 59–63.
43 See Johnson.
44 Ife, ‘The real and its effect…’.
45 See Forcione, Cervantes and the Humanist Vision.
46 See Thompson.
47 See Ife, ‘From Stage to Page…’.
Chapter 12
Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda
historia setentrional (1617)
Michael Armstrong-Roche
Wesleyan University
Introduction
Days before his death on 22 April 1616, Cervantes wrote the famously
wry dedication for Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda: Historia
setentrional. Published the following year by Cervantes’s widow
Catalina de Salazar y Palacios, Persiles was the triumphant capstone to
a remarkable run of works written, revised, or concluded in the wake of
the first part of Don Quixote. Cervantes would leave his inventive stamp
on every major genre of literary entertainment then fashionable:
myriad verse forms (his ballads and burlesque sonnets were
celebrated), drama, pastoral and chivalric novels, the novella, the
Menippean satirical dream, and the Heliodoran adventure novel. He
toyed with still others (the morisca, the picaresque, and the sentimental
novel) as interpolated tale, incident, or passing characterization. One
mark of his inventiveness was the astonishing freedom with which he
handled these generic worlds. He experimented to the end with new
ways to integrate patterns and effects, to honour and to send up. The
last four years of his life, which saw a rapid succession of publications,
suggest a veteran writer (sixty-six in 1613) used to taking his time but
now acutely aware it was running out. Proud of the 1605 Quixote’s wild
popularity, Cervantes was also anxious to shape his literary legacy so
that it would not be swallowed up by the run-away success of that
burlesque about the mad knight and his proverb-spouting sidekick—a
bone of contention especially palpable in the Viaje del Parnaso (1614)
and the prologue to his eight plays with their interludes printed in
1615.
Cervantes certainly regarded Persiles as the jewel in his crown,
touting it five times between 1613 and 1615 before it found its way
into print. He even predicts, in the dedication to his patron the Count
of Lemos for the second part of Don Quixote (1615), that Persiles will be
the 
best 
or 
worst 
‘libro…de 
entretenimiento’ 
[‘book…of
entertainment’]1 yet written in the Spanish language. And then he takes
back the equivocation, because—as he tells it—his friends assured him
it was as good as could be hoped. His tongue-in-cheek confidence was
immediately seconded by his readers. It went through six printings in
its first year, a success matching that of the first part of the Quixote. By
1629, ten editions had appeared, compared to nine editions of the first
part of Don Quixote between 1605 and 1615. Seven more followed in
the eighteenth century when Cervantes’s first biographer, Gregorio
Mayans, wrote in 1737 that Persiles surpassed Don Quixote in its
invention and sublime style. It met with a comparable success abroad,
seeing two translations into French in 1618, another into English in
1619 (followed soon by Fletcher and Massinger’s stage adaptation, The
Custom of the Country), and a third into Italian in 1626. Having fallen
out of favour in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, Persiles
has undergone a remarkable revival in the past fifty years—in large
measure because modern epic (Faust, Ulysses, and One Hundred Years of
Solitude), modernism, genre fiction, the adventure novel, and magical
realism have vastly expanded scholarly appreciation for the evolution
of literary taste beyond nineteenth-century realism2.
Cervantes provided a clue to his high hopes for this novel and its
genesis in the prologue to the Novelas ejemplares (1613): ‘se atreve a
competir con Heliodoro, si ya por atrevido no sale con las manos en la
cabeza’3 [‘It dares to compete with Heliodorus, if it does not come out
with its hands on its head for its daring’]. Heliodorus’s late Hellenistic
novel, the Aethiopica, had enjoyed a sixteenth-century revival with
translations into the European vernaculars (from 1547 into French,
1554 and 1587 into Spanish, 1554 into German, 1559 into Italian, and
1569 into English) and imitations almost immediately thereafter. Far
from merely riding the coattails of Don Quixote’s phenomenal success,
Persiles came out at the high-water mark of the vogue for Greek novels
in Spain, which ran from the 1550s through the early 1630s.4 Across
Europe, imitations of Heliodorus proliferated well into the seventeenth
century and were read fervently until the end of the following century:
Mary Wroth’s Urania (1621), Gomberville’s Plexandre (1632–7),
Madeleine de Scudéry’s Artamène ou le Grand Cyrus (1649–53), Anton
Ulrich’s Aramena (1669–73), and Aphra Behn’s Oroonoko (1688), to cite
a few. Thomas Pavel reminds us, in a history of the novel sensitive both
to continuities and innovations from Antiquity to the present, that key
features of Heliodorus’s art went on inspiring writers and readers into
the modern period: the sublimely chaste and resistant heroine re-
emerging in Richardson’s Pamela or the delightfully improbable series
of coincidences in Dickens’ Oliver Twist.
In the Aethiopica’s Renaissance reception there was a Heliodorus for
every taste.5 Cervantes explored its possibilities in early works, as in
the Algerian-captivity play El trato de Argel and the Silerio and Timbrio
thread of his pastoral novel La Galatea. Long-standing acquaintance
with the Aethiopica, possibly through the partial translation of 1554, is
suggested by his lifelong interest in its defining features: the travel
motif; the thematic core of a pure love that must overcome diverse
contretemps (mistaken identity, imminent or false death, shipwreck,
separation, recognition scenes) until consummated in matrimony; and a
narrative structure defined by a long, often interrupted arc that plunges
us into the thick of things before doubling back on itself. Persiles would
embrace the whole catalogue of Heliodoran devices: young, chaste,
beautiful lovers passing themselves off as siblings; far-flung settings and
polyglot worlds; threatening barbarians; pirates; storms; abduction and
captivity; delayed identification (by pseudonym or unnamed voice),
dissembling, and disguise; premonitions and prophecies; and reunion,
marriage, and political succession—all seasoned by an in medias res
beginning, hair-raising suspense, and not a little of Cervantes’s own
nudge-and-wink irreverence made familiar by Don Quixote’s narrative
hijinks.
By the late sixteenth century, humanists across Europe looked on the
Aethiopica as the acme of long prose fictions.6 It was admired for
striking the right balance in a tale of love and adventure between
marvel and verisimilitude; for leavening unity of plot with episodic
variety; for astonishing maze-like narrative virtuosity and exquisite
attention 
to 
suspense; 
and 
for 
moral 
exemplarity, 
decorum,
encyclopaedic erudition, and eloquence. It was sometimes held up as a
more palatable alternative to the rampant marvels (dragons, magic, and
enchanted castles), ramifying episodes, indecorousness, and (often
illicit) love stories of the chivalric books.
One authoritative strain of humanist literary precept (represented by
Amyot, Tasso, and El Pinciano) gradually concluded it might fill a void
in Aristotle’s Poetics7. The Philosopher had no example of a prose
narrative comparable to the great Homeric and Virgilian verse epics.
Heliodorus’s revival provided one for a period, especially in Spain, that
saw the heady proliferation of new kinds of prose entertainment. They
tumbled one upon the next in great generic waves from the
international vogue for the Spanish sentimental or epistolary novel and
Celestina cycles launched in the late fifteenth century through the
chivalric, picaresque, pastoral, and Greek novel cycles over the course
of the sixteenth century; and from Antonio de Guevara’s wry pseudo-
histories (among the great sixteenth-century European bestsellers) to
the taste for Moorish, Italianate, and cortesana novellas up to and
beyond Persiles’s publication. By the end of Cervantes’s life, an
imitation of the Aethiopica, understood in neo-Aristotelian terms as a
prose epic that embodied ‘poetry’s’ (‘literature’s’) status as ‘queen of the
sciences’, was the supreme mark of literary achievement. In Cervantes’s
hands it was also an occasion to prove that a literature of
entertainment was by no means inimical to the highest intellectual and
aesthetic ambition.
Persiles is a tour de force of these received ideas about Heliodorus,
but it also subtly ironizes them. Readers can never be sure when and
whether it takes them seriously. Indeed to judge by Cervantes’s
practice, the audacity and the tongue-in-cheek equivocation may well
be the most reliable features of his preliminary announcements. Persiles
leaves no generic or ideological crown on its head. The Heliodoran and
epic lineages, though undeniable, are anything but pure. Nowhere is
Cervantes’s genius for ventriloquizing a parade of genres, styles, and
points of view more virtuosically displayed. Crossing idealized Greek
novel and learned epic with the picaresque novel; pastoral, chivalric,
and Italian romanzo with the cortesana and morisca novel; the
sentimental epistolary novel with palace comedy; theatrical entremés
and captivity plays with Petrarchan and religious lyric; the novella with
allegory; and (anticipating a development of the Spanish Heliodoran
novel in the 1620s)8 the mirror of princes with farce, Persiles refuses to
stand generically still. It delights in shifting among narrative, lyrical,
epistolary, aphoristic, homiletic, catechistic, and theatrical modes. Its
stylistic registers range no less freely, from the Ciceronian sublime (the
swelling periodic waves of the opening chapters miming the storm-
tossed seas of the maritime settings) to the burlesque ridiculous (the
narrator’s sometimes obstreperous intrusions, Bartolomé’s riotous letter
in Rome).
Ideologically, Persiles is no less daring. For a novel (and genre) often
consigned to the dustbin of romance never-never land, it finds many
ways to insist on the here and now of European life. It departs from
Heliodorus’s archaizing tendency by explicit reference to near-
contemporary events such as the death of Charles V (1558) and the
expulsion of the moriscos (1609). Despite (or because of) the occasional
made-up geography and the use of neo-Platonic and Augustinian tropes
(lovers seeking their lost halves, love’s flame as a destructive fire of the
body or a guiding light for the soul, desiring souls seeking rest in God,
and Rome city of God as well as of cupidity), Persiles registers a
remarkable range of pressing contemporary phenomena: intensified
global mobility, racial mixing, linguistic and cultural alienation,
debates over the meaning of barbarism, maritime commerce, piracy,
the traffic in humans, messianic imperialism, dynastic politics, court
intrigue, the duties of sovereigns, judicial corruption, religious reform,
conversion, increasing Crown and Church regulation of violence (e.g.
duelling) and marriage, competition between aristocratic and bourgeois
values (e.g. the bases of honour), recurring tensions within family
structures (challenges to primogeniture, paternal authority, received
gender roles, the competing claims of arranged marriage and marriage
choice), the increasing professionalization of entertainment (the
commercial stage, the book trade), and new forms of humanistic and
scientific rationalism (including vigorous contemporary Spanish
debates about fraudulent histories). We are more likely to understand
the hold in this period of a genre that can now seem hopelessly archaic
and idealizing if we recognize, with Cervantes and his readers, how
well it lent itself to exploring the hotly contested conflicts of its day.
Tonally, Persiles is a vast experiment in tragicomedy, a narrative
reply to the prodigiously creative testing of the boundaries of tragic
and comic modes that was taking place on the Spanish stage. The novel
even signals its agonistic response to the theatrical innovations of
Cervantes’s rival Lope de Vega in Book III. The heroes arrive in
Badajoz, and soon the Spanish playwright of a famous company of
players is taken with Sigismunda’s ‘talle’ [‘figure’] and ‘brío’9 [‘spirit’].
Wanting to make her his leading lady, he puzzles over whether their
story should be called a tragedy, comedy, or tragicomedy. Exquisitely
modulating the many possible shadings on that sliding scale, Persiles
thus keeps its readers guessing about its tonal direction much as we are
kept guessing about the heroes’ identities or even their definitive
itinerary (by way of England, France, or Spain?) to Rome. Cervantes
thereby competes not only with Heliodorus but also with Lope de Vega
and the playwrights who followed him.
Overview of the Plot(s)
Persiles10 is about prince Persiles and princess Sigismunda, from the
Arctic island kingdoms of Tile (in English, Thule, glossed also as
Iceland in Book IV) and Frislanda (Friesland in English) near the North
Pole. The two young, chaste, bewitchingly (and sometimes fatally)
beautiful lovers make their way south from these northern European
homelands by island-hopping to Lisbon and then overland to Rome in a
journey that will last two years. The historical references, though not
consistent (and sometimes anachronistic), tend to place the main action
in the years 1557 to 1559 (or, alternately, around 1606).11
Persiles is next in line to the succession of Tile, Sigismunda crown
princess of the neighbouring (and even more northerly) island of
Frislanda. The princess had been entrusted to Tile’s royal family for
safekeeping from wars threatened by certain enemies of Frislanda’s
queen Eusebia. She had also been sent to ensure Persiles’s eldest
brother, Tile’s crown prince Maximino, would marry her. Instead, while
Maximino is off fighting wars of his own, Persiles falls madly, near-
fatally, in love with Sigismunda. Indeed he does so with such abandon
that his mother Eustoquia, fearing for his life and preferring his
‘gracias’ [‘graces’] to Maximino’s ‘aspereza’12 [‘coarseness’], sends the
two packing for Rome on the pretext of a pilgrimage to receive further
instruction in the Catholic faith. Maximino in the meantime is dazzled
by Sigismunda’s portrait and asks she be kept for his wife.
The pilgrimage (in part an alibi for a chaste elopement) would
enable them to buy time, to find a way to marry and yet somehow
honour the first-born Maximino’s right to Sigismunda’s hand. Alienated
from their titles and privileges, they travel as siblings under the cover
of aliases (Periandro and Auristela) to disguise their love and keep one
step ahead of Maximino.13 Strictly observing the heroine’s ironclad vow
of chastity (a handy excuse for importunate suitors as well as vital to
Sigismunda’s sense of herself), their wanderings take them from a
barbarian isle near Tile by sea to various made-up islands (Golandia,
Policarpo’s, the isle of Hermits) in northern Atlantic waters (Books I
and II). They then journey by land from Lisbon (where they trade their
animal skins for pilgrims’ habits in order to draw less attention)
through Spain, France, and Italy (Book III) to their quest’s conclusion in
Rome (Book IV).
They meet with multiple actual or made-up ordeals along the way,
the would-be Herculean trabajos, or labours, of the title. These include
captivity by corsairs, separation, ships grounded on frozen seas,
leviathans, designs on virtue and lives, and their own crippling fits of
jealousy. And they cross paths with many characters whose vexed
destinies, trials, and stories offer a cracked mirror for their own. The
commonplace tropes of the pilgrimages of love, life, and religion14 have
often obscured the novel’s equally marked interest in politics, what we
might call its political pilgrimage—the crises of successive island
kingdoms (the barbarian isle in Book I, Policarpo’s isle in Book II, and
Tile in Book IV), the ideal commonwealth and false utopia of
Policarpo’s rule, pervasive court intrigue (at Clodio and Rosamunda’s
English court, Leopoldio’s Danean court, Policarpo’s isle, Renato’s
French court, and Rome’s papal court), and the education of princes.15
The story about religious pilgrims is presented as an alibi for the
love story (notably for the hero, Persiles). In turn, the pilgrimage of
love prepares the protagonists for Tile’s political succession and the
dynastic union of the two kingdoms in the final pages of the novel—
when, following the fortuitous death of Persiles’s amorous and political
rival, the first-born Maximino, they are finally free to marry. Maximino,
just before dying of an illness [‘mutación’] contracted hot on the
heroes’ trail in the disease-infested marshes of central Italy,
magnanimously joins the badly wounded Persiles in matrimony to the
matchlessly beautiful Sigismunda. Sigismunda, nevertheless, remains
hopelessly torn between marriage and the convent to the end.
And yet we get none of this straight. Readers are plunged into the
middle of the journey in Book I and only gradually catch up to the
present by the narrative midpoint at the end of Book II. Identities are
routinely disguised and the full backstory about the protagonists’
origins and the cause of their voyage not fully revealed until the final
pages of Book IV in Rome. Role reversals are the norm. In the
meantime, the apparently heroic tale of exemplarity is hedged around
at every turn by ironizing doubts (explicit or situational) about who is
who, which if any voice (including the narrator’s) can be reliably
believed, whether virtue is always a blessing, and whether there are
truths in fictions or even in lies. How the novel is told by its
unabashedly self-fashioning characters or the unnamed (and subtly
biased) narrator is as much what the experience of reading Persiles is
about as any other work by Cervantes. The narrator prides himself on
his historian’s chops, so he dutifully records carpings about the heroes,
but his narrative reflexes are those of a poet’s (in Cervantes’s neo-
Aristotelian sense of fiction-writer) and his sympathies lie ultimately
with his decorum-defying protagonists.
The novel is no less interested in the adventure of story-telling than
in high-seas corsairs, talking wolves, and flying carpets: that is, in
exploring how to hook an audience (the heroes themselves often
serving as stand-ins for Persiles’s readers); how to persuade it to believe
improbable truths and revealing lies; how far to push its patience and
credulity and negotiate the irreducible variety of tastes; whether the
pertinent truth of a story (or history) is literal or metaphorical; how to
translate the narrative into other genres and arts (sonnets, songs, and a
Marian hymn in octaves; history painting and portraiture; theatre; and
a collection of aphorisms); how to make an entertainment out of
considerations of craft; and what the relationship between profane and
sacred idolatry of an image or between possession of a portrait and the
person portrayed might be. Persiles delights in the play of nested
mediations, in filters and reconstructions that depend on both the
spoken and written word and that prompt recurring debate about the
pertinence, truth, or plausibility of the narrative.16 No surprise then
that it presents itself as a story written by an anonymous historian, the
autor, which comes to us translated, edited, and glossed by an equally
anonymous narrator who is consistently neither omniscient, nor
reliable, nor always even decorous.
The Familiar made Strange: A Lucianic
Persiles
Despite a long-standing habit of pitting Don Quixote against Persiles17,
all of Cervantes’s late works share family resemblances: (1) the
persistent fascination with the soldier-writer and -courtier (or arms and
letters) theme, which was a personal and not merely rhetorical matter
for him;18 (2) the probing examination of the ambiguities of heroism;
(3) the mirroring of characters and plot lines, often featuring heroines
who imitate, revise, contradict, and sometimes upstage the heroes; (4)
the sardonic testing of precursors;19 and (5) the interplay of literary
codes and contemporary life, including such late sixteenth-century
intellectual fashions as scepticism and neo-Stoicism. And then there is
perhaps the glory of the Cervantes de senectute: that intimate,
ubiquitous, and slippery narrative voice, which alternately feigns
omniscience and undercuts it.20
Following the spectacular commercial success of Mateo Alemán’s
picaresque Guzmán de Alfarache,21 there was no straightforward way
back to idealizing modes. Neither the chivalric, nor the pastoral, nor
the Greek example could be taken up without considerable hedging.22
Cervantes apparently was not won over by the picaresque solution,
save as an ‘exemplary novella’ or an episodic tale.23 For his longer
works of prose fiction he sought a middle ground, with its own forking
paths; hence the parodic solution in Don Quixote and the subtly
ironized one in Persiles.24 They complement each other even as
tragicomic experiments: Don Quixote, a burlesque ‘history’ that ends
tragically (with the defeat and death of the hero); and Persiles, an
anonymous ‘history’ sealed by the happy ending par excellence
(marriage) but haunted until the last page by actual or threatened
tragedy.
Persiles is no less irreverent than Don Quixote although it is more
devious about it. The comparison may help us take the measure of
Persiles’s originality as another facet of the same creative program.25
Nothing is more revealing, for example, than to recognize in Persiles
the ‘caballero cortesano’ [‘courtier’] Don Quixote takes to be his foil,
filtered through Heliodorus and ironized in counterpoint with epic:26 to
be sure, more trickster than tricked.27 Female protagonism and the
centrality of love are conventional in the Greek novel. The heroes tend
to be more consorts than genuine protagonists.28 By contrast to
Heliodorus, Cervantes recovers male protagonism without relegating
the female. He lends epic attributes to Persiles (a long retrospective
narrative, a premonitory dream, his own kingdom, explicit references,
and the heroic reminiscence of the title) that Heliodorus denies his hero
Theagenes. At the same time, Persiles does not subordinate love as
typically happens in epic. As if to confirm the Virgilian subtext, the
narrator resorts to a comparison between the queen of Carthage and
the abandoned princess Sinforosa ‘como si fuera otra engañada y nueva
Dido’29 [‘as if she were another deceived and new Dido’]. And yet as if
to rewrite Virgil in a conjugal key, Sigismunda and Persiles together
stand in here for Aeneas as he sails away from Dido.
Both Don Quixote and Persiles are reader-heroes, paradoxical
hybrids of arms and letters, and transgressors of their social status who
reinvent themselves through their mastery of language.30 Both are
protagonists of a translated, edited, and glossed ‘history’, that is a tale
mediated by a narrative voice who offers no guarantees of certainty.
We are not allowed to forget that in each case we are reading one
version among other possible ones of the stories they record.
The differences are equally telling. If Don Quixote is the mad hero
with lucid intervals, Persiles, as we shall see, is the hero of his ‘gusto’
[‘preference, pleasure, or taste’] inclined to put norms to the test—in
his love for Sigismunda no less than in how he chooses to spin his tale.
The chivalric knight is the paladin of arms who fashions himself in
imitation of his books; Persiles, the hero of love and letters who rivals
his warrior and first-born brother Maximino.31 More protean32 and less
monomaniacal than Don Quixote, Persiles succeeds in imposing his
narrative—with the decisive collaboration of Sigismunda33 and his
mother Eustoquia,34 Maximino’s providential death, and the narrator’s
complicity.35 No doubt the chasm between who he is and what he
wishes to be is less yawning. But his victory is owed in no small
measure to his knowing how to listen.36 If Persiles is a mythomaniacal
hero, he is of a kind infinitely more open to the word of other
characters—to begin with Sigismunda’s, whose explicit consent he
never delegates (unlike Arnaldo) to others.37 One might even recognize
in his triumph over his brother a renewed novelistic expression of the
Renaissance rise of the ‘lettered’ [‘letrado’] courtier and his
displacement of the warrior function of the nobility proposed as a
subtext for Don Quixote.38 As a political hero he is certainly more in
tune with the historical moment of publication (1617), dominated by
the uneasy peace with France, England, and the Dutch Republic that
has been called Phillip III’s Pax Hispanica.39
Reading it alongside the Viaje del Parnaso (1614) is no less
suggestive. It is striking that Cervantes and his Nordic hero should
share a taste for the Spanish Renaissance soldier-poet Garcilaso de la
Vega. The poet’s lionization in Cervantes’s Menippean dream is
matched by the intense (and reiterated) identification of Persiles with
him, the aesthetic of the interpolated poems,40 and even the opening
salvo of a hendecasyllabic41 line—a sign in the Viaje of Garcilaso’s
metrical innovations with respect to the traditional octosyllable.42 We
will see how Persiles’s devotion to Garcilaso, and the oblique use he
makes of the poet’s famous sonnet X in his tale, lends him a distinct
advantage over his rival, the Danish prince Arnaldo. Persiles thus
transposes a lyrical paragon to a novelistic one, crossing Garcilaso’s
amorous subject with the living example of the paradigmatic soldier-
poet. If we also bear in mind that Cervantes’s great contemporary, the
poet Luis de Góngora, is perhaps the decisive hero of the Viaje del
Parnaso,43 and remember the similarities of theme and protagonist
(with Las soledades) and even of style,44 Persiles can come across as a
narrative intervention in the battle for good poetry waged between the
Viaje’s swans and crows.45
The will to innovate is evident in Persiles from its incipit. It is striking
that Cervantes should set himself apart from Heliodorus, Lope (El
peregrino en su patria), and even Góngora (Las soledades) in something
so defining of the Aethiopica as the use of the hypotyposis to kick things
off:46 the bravura visual description of an enigmatic scene, in this
tradition with a shipwreck. Instead he elects to emphasize, in the first
place, the oral over the visual. He displaces what Manuel Baumbach
has called Heliodorus’s properly visual ‘ecphrastic riddle’47 to Persiles’s
epic narration in Book II.48 In the beginning was the word, but the
word in Persiles is a plural voice:
Voces daba el bárbaro Corsicurvo
a la estrecha boca de una profunda
mazmorra, antes sepultura que prisión
de muchos cuerpos vivos que en ella estaban
sepultados, y, aunque su terrible y espantoso
estruendo cerca y lejos se escuchaba,
de nadie eran entendidas articuladamente
las razones que pronunciaba sino de la
miserable Cloelia, a quien sus desventuras
en aquella profundidad tenían encerrada.49
[The Barbarian Corsicurvo shouted into the narrow
mouth of the deep dungeon, more a tomb than a prison
for the many living bodies buried there, and, although
the terrifying and awful din could be heard near and far,
not a soul could make out the sense of his words but
for the miserable Cloelia, whose misfortunes had
condemned her to those dismal depths.]
Readers are tuned into Persiles’s equivocating style from that opening
word. Voces means shouts in the idiom dar voces but on its own also
stood for voices and words. The barbarian and Christian themes
germinate in those ‘voices’: an archetypal attribute by which the insider
was distinguished from the outsider, the ‘civilized’ from the babbling,
broken- or fork-tongued barbarian. ‘Voces’ too announces not so much
a challenge to as a boldly suggestive play on a Gospel promise: ‘In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was made flesh and dwelt
among us’, as the first chapter of the Book of John proclaims in a text
often read at Easter celebrations.
Only the singular is made plural. In Cervantes’s novelistic beginning
are words, voices, and shouts: the confusion of voices50 that will
narrate, sing, recite, converse, disagree, praise, reproach, accuse, laugh,
cry, and shout in what follows, like the cries that Corsicurvo emits at
the narrow mouth of the dungeon where the hero and the novel appear
to be born. Persiles’s world of words does often turn out to be a Babel in
need of translation and negotiation, between peoples and languages,
between private gusto and public ley, between the rival gustos of
characters, and finally—as Sigismunda’s doubts in Rome show—even
between competing gustos within individual characters. The novel thus
becomes a figure for the incarnation of its themes: the word made flesh
in the sense of the word enacted, so that its poetics and its ethics model
one another.
At the same time, as if in ingenious emulation of Cervantes’s
admired Góngora, the voices of the barbarian Corsicurvo break at the
beginning with the tense silence that the poet had sustained until the
end of his mythological fable (about Polyphemus) for the ‘horrenda’
[‘horrible’] voice of the ‘fiero’ [‘savage’] one-eyed giant—in those
‘estancias polifemas’ [‘polyphemic stanzas’] held up as the measure of
good poetry in Cervantes’s Viaje.51
The desire to marry the elevated with the popular and verse with
prose52 is evident from that initial hendecasyllable. It appears to tip its
hat to the elite, neo-Aristotelian, reception of Heliodorus as a prose
epic53—much as the opening of Don Quixote with the cadence of a
ballad seems to announce its popular credentials. Nevertheless, Persiles
revels, no less than the Quixote, in the confusion of registers, languages,
and genres. The hendecasyllable embraces, at once, the cries of the
barbarian Corsicurvo and his razones understood by Cloelia.54 The
meter points to two conventionally antagonistic elite genres (the heroic
and the lyric), whose experimental crossing Persiles essays in a manner
no less innovative than Góngora in his contemporary Las soledades.
And if Cervantes dares to compete with Heliodorus by opening his
Greek novel to the epic and the lyric, he does so as well by opening it
to orality, popular genres, and comic registers55. The poet José
Valdivieso, a fellow warrior in the ranks of the Viaje’s swans and the
admired friend of Cervantes (as of Lope and Góngora)56 who signed
Persiles’s ecclesiastical license [‘Aprobación’], put it this way: ‘de
cuantos nos dejó escritos, ninguno es más ingenioso, más culto ni más
entretenido’57 [‘of those he left among his writings, none is more
ingenious, more learned, nor more entertaining’]. It may serve as a
miniature poetics for its permanent challenge to readers, calling on us
to respond at once to its wit, its learning, and its high spirits.
The sardonic wit of Persiles is especially conspicuous in its playful
confusion of the marvellous with the familiar. It tends to erase the
boundary between the known and the unknown. It also shows how
qualities we often celebrate in Cervantes and literary modernity—moral
ambiguity, irony, and defamiliarization—might owe more than we
acknowledge to the Renaissance reception of Lucian in Spain.58 Indeed,
although Cervantes anoints Persiles as a ‘libro de entretenimiento’
[‘book of entertainment’], in the great Lucianic tradition of serio ludere
art his practice reminds us that moral complexity can be a pleasure as
well as a lesson. If it teaches and delights, it does so in a stubbornly
idiosyncratic way, often discovering problems in virtues and virtues in
moral falls.
A key strategy for transforming moral conflict into entertainment is
the paradoxical play made possible by the Lucianesque faux naïf
perspective on the known world. It relies on the intuition that strange
things happen in reality. The faux naïf—or inversion of perspective
personified—is possible in Persiles thanks to the presence of northern
(barbarian and Nordic) protagonists in southern (Catholic) lands.59 It is
Persiles’s most striking innovation with respect to Heliodorus’s
Aethiopica, its avowed model, and Lope de Vega’s El peregrino en su
patria, its nearest rival.60
Cervantes’s use of at once exotic (for early readers) and heroic (if far
from perfect) protagonists enables a paradoxical perspective on the
world of his early readers. It highlights what is strange, marvellous, and
surprising about that supposedly familiar world. Yet if Persiles invites its
earliest readers to look at themselves with alien eyes, it also corrects
satire’s tendency to assume moral clarity. By translating satirical
dialogue into narrative and disseminating the faux naïf perspective
among multiple competing narrative voices, successively displaced and
sometimes questioned, Persiles softens the hard edge of moral certainty.
In its stead we get a playfully unsettling—at once entertaining and
edifying—indeterminacy. It is a fundamental source of the most
delicious ironies that run through the novel and articulates quite varied
moments and effects.
If Lope de Vega shows up Heliodorus by recognizing that the ‘patria’
[‘the homeland’] of his novel’s title also lends itself to ‘peregrinas’
[‘strange’, ‘foreign’, or ‘pilgrim’] adventures, Cervantes in turn shows
up Lope by highlighting the strangeness of (‘lo peregrino de’) the patria.
The narrator never tires, in effect, of reminding us of the strange,
surprising, and marvellous prodigies not only of the novel’s northern
lands but also of its southern ones: the ‘peregrina, tan peregrina’ [‘the
truly odd pilgrim’] near Talavera, Spain61 and the ‘maravillas’
[‘marvels’] of her tale of Spain’s Marian devotions; ‘el nuevo y estraño
caso’ [‘the new and strange case’] of Perpignan; ‘la estraña historia’
[‘the strange story’] of Count Domicio in France; ‘la maravilla estraña’
[‘the strange marvel’] and the ‘maravilloso silencio’ [‘the marvellous
silence’] of Ruperta’s episode in Provence; and ‘las maravillas’ [‘the
marvels’]) of the inn a day’s journey from Rome. If, as Isabel Lozano-
Renieblas has suggested, the protagonism of northern characters and
the journey through a familiar world (for early readers) are an
innovation with respect to Heliodorus, no less innovative is the
inverted perspective that highlights the strangeness of that (putatively)
familiar world.62 The response is authorized precisely by the viewpoint
of outsider protagonists.
Beyond rhetoric, Persiles playfully tracks a novelistic south as prone
as its north to homicidal revenge, forced marriage, the sacrifice of
freedom, abduction and captivity, the temptation of suicide,
overwhelming jealousy and grief, judicial corruption, poisonings,
sorcery, judiciary astrology, fulfilled prophecies and premonitions, and
even the marvel of characters who (appear to) fly, as in the case of
Claricia in France. The northern (barbarian) motif of the extracted,
pulverized, or pierced heart is repeated with multiple variations all the
way to Rome.63 From the vantage of Persiles and Sigismunda, Rome is
their north, their finis terrae, and their Ultima Thule, a city in equal
measure of marvels, blessings, and menaces. These geographic choices
make it possible for Persiles’s Rome to take the place of the marvellous
periphery in Heliodorus’s Aethiopica, the Ethiopian capital of Meroe. It
also makes it possible for the novel to structure itself, as we shall see,
around the reversibility of the road to Rome.
The opening chapter describes the ravishingly beautiful hero,
Periandro, as he is hauled out of a dungeon. He is to be sacrificed
according to the law honoured by a barbarian community on another
isle. As they sail, a barbarian captor nocks and draws an arrow, aiming
it menacingly at the bound youth’s chest. Overcome however by the
hero’s beauty, the barbarian is unable to kill him. Lending an ironic
cast to the novel’s neo-Platonizing conflation of beauty with virtue, that
same beauty—along with the heroine’s and Antonio el mozo’s—will
nevertheless unleash the deadliest passions at the most Catholic courts
of Policarpo’s Isle in Book II and Rome in Book IV. Back in Chapter 1, a
sudden storm sinks the ship and the hero is rescued by another vessel.
The apparently generous captain of that ship will turn out to be his
chief rival (besides his brother) for Auristela, Prince Arnaldo of
Denmark. This Christian prince (ostensibly Protestant, although he
makes no bones about Auristela’s Catholicism) will have no
compunction 
about 
selling 
another 
innocent 
woman, 
Taurisa
(Auristela’s maidservant), to the barbarians. She is to find out what she
can about Auristela, taken from Arnaldo by corsairs in an earlier raid
and possibly sold to the barbarians. The reason for Arnaldo’s (tacit)
religious tolerance, as well as his slide into human trafficking, may well
lie in his nature. Auristela effectively is his religion. He makes this fact
plain enough by wooing her with one of many variations wrung in this
novel on Augustine’s renowned trope for a restlessly desiring soul
finding peace only in God (Confessions I.1).64 Often taken for an
allegorical key of the whole novel, what is less frequently noted is how
routinely characters (and ultimately possibly even the narrator) pervert
Augustine’s sense by reorienting it toward profane love. Arnaldo thinks
he has found peace (and God) in Auristela.
The barbarians are said to be governed by a prophetic law, a test of
elective monarchy handed down by an ancient sage. It predicts a
braveheart will prove himself to lead the barbarians by showing no
disgust at eating the pulverized heart of a sacrificed man. He will then
marry the most beautiful woman bought or abducted for that purpose
and sire a son destined to lead the barbarians in world conquest—
plausibly a burlesque parody of European foundation myths and ideas
of a God-given mission to conquer and evangelize the world, as Diana
de Armas Wilson has proposed. Periandro offers to take Taurisa’s place,
and his disguise convinces everyone (says the narrator) that he is the
most beautiful woman in the world. Persiles here turns the Aethiopica on
its head: when Heliodorus’s Hellenized hero and heroine finally marry
and are crowned sovereigns of Ethiopia, the moment is marked by the
suppression of the Ethiopian custom of human sacrifice. Cervantes
instead opens rather than closes his novel with a sacrificial ritual whose
successive local variations are never altogether put behind them.
Indeed, we learn that the northern barbarian isle is reconstituting itself
in Book IV, just as we are discovering that Rome itself is no New
Jerusalem.
This reversal of Heliodorus becomes one of Persiles’s major sources
of irony. Even as the heroes put more distance between themselves and
the barbarian isle, they find that variations on key features of its
characters, customs, and prophetic laws (including the sacrificial motif
of the man’s knife-extracted heart and the abduction of a beautiful
woman) dog them for good and for ill through the Catholic lands all
the way to Rome. Book IV most resembles Book II, Rome mirroring
Policarpo’s Isle inasmuch as they are both major Catholic courts,
ostensible republics of virtue, and places where Periandro and Auristela
recover their protagonism in ‘real time’. Putatively a redeeming of the
barbarians’ isle (Book I) and the false utopia of Policarpo’s isle (Book
II)—kingdoms destroyed in conflagrations as a result of their rulers’
unbridled passions—Rome is the scene both of the protagonists’
apotheosis and the perilous re-enactment of those same northern island
kingdoms.
The party is received by the barbarians led by a captive translator,
the beautiful maid Transila. Although from an island near Britain and
Ireland, she addresses them in Polish. Polish serves here as a rough-
and-ready northern lingua franca in place of the language of the
barbarians. It exemplifies the novel’s overt polyglossia, a feature that
may well have been inspired by Heliodorus.65 The Norwegian-speaking
heroes prove adept at crossing many linguistic borders: Periandro is an
avid reader of Garcilaso in Spanish, both heroes pass for Spaniards once
they cross into France in Book III, and in Rome Periandro speaks
German to the pope’s Swiss guards. This pervasive code-switching, one
more sign of the hero’s Odyssean resourcefulness, turns out to be a
structuring device for the novel itself. In Book II we learn that Persiles
itself is the edited translation of a history, although unlike Don Quixote
(said to be translated from Arabic) we are never told what the source
language is.
There is no word yet of Auristela, because as we will soon learn she
too has disguised herself—only as a man. Transila, the most beautiful
woman on the island (for the nonce) and therefore marked to be the
barbarian queen, is forthwith eclipsed by the beauty of the cross-
dressed Periandro. S/he bewitches the barbarian governor into paying
generously with gold and pearls for him/her. The governor’s rival,
Bradamiro (described as both brave and an arrogant scofflaw), is
smitten at once by the sight of Periandro and decides to flout his
people’s prophetic laws and keep the (apparent) woman for himself.
The novel, which revels like this at every turn in disguise, deception,
and misreading, dances continually on the knife’s edge of situational
irony.
The upshot is that a man arrives with the guard (the elderly Cloelia)
of the dungeon where Periandro had been held captive. Periandro now
recognizes Cloelia, who serves Auristela but does not yet see through
the princess’s disguise. The governor immediately orders the sacrifice
of the man in order to test the prophetic law. This too will turn out to
be a (tragic or comic?) misreading: the man is the cross-dressed
Auristela. And Cloelia, in a fit over Auristela’s despairing silence, tries
to save her by revealing the violation of the barbarians’ prophecy.
Before Periandro’s disguise is discovered, however, Bradamiro claims
the woman (actually Periandro) for himself and insists on freeing the
man (actually Auristela) since that is the wish of the woman
(Periandro) he loves. This confused, at once noble and selfish, act—a
service to Bradamiro’s presumed lady that is a violation of his people’s
law, as well as a comically mistaken reading of the heroes—outrages
the barbarian governor. He nocks an arrow and kills Bradamiro by
shooting him through the mouth and piercing his tongue.
Bradamiro’s death in Book I provokes a general melee between the
governor’s and Bradamiro’s factions, the barbarians turn on each other,
the isle is set on fire, and its captives (including the novel’s heroes)
make their escape. A young barbarian approaches Periandro through
the inky blackness and, speaking mysteriously in Spanish, urges him to
follow him to his father and mother’s cave. Described as a human
angel, he offers them the charity and compassion of his barbarian
mother Ricla and sister Costanza. We learn that the fifty-year old
Spanish castaway Antonio and his thirty-year old wife have, for fifteen
years, lived there in a kind of double exile (Antonio from Spain, Ricla
from her own barbarian community) with their son Antonio (also
known as the barbarian) and a daughter named Constanza.
In ways large and small we can detect the will to rewrite epic. Much
as Persiles early on illustrates Cervantes’s stated desire to compete with
Heliodorus by reversing the order and significance of the motif of
human sacrifice, it now also establishes its epic credentials and desire
to compete with The Odyssey. Cervantes throws down the gantlet by
felling Bradamiro with an arrow through the tongue, a northern
barbarian upstart’s fate to match that of the Greek Antinous—the first
of Penelope’s arrogant suitors struck down by Odysseus with an arrow
said to pierce his chin and throat in the closing banquet scene (Odyssey
XXII). It also anticipates the mistake that will lead, in a fortuitous act
that is also a kind of poetic justice, to the death of the English court
parasite, slanderer, and occasional truth-teller Clodio at Policarpo’s
court (Book II). Clodio too will die by an arrow through the tongue,
shot by Antonio the barbarian, though meant for Cenotia.
Persiles’s challenge to The Aeneid is no less conspicuous from the
beginning. Behind Antonio el bárbaro’s rescue is the long shadow of
Aeneas’s spectacular plunge into the flames of Troy (Aeneid II), from
which he saved his father Anchises. The image of Aeneas’s escape from
the burning city, bearing his aged father on his shoulders, was so
memorable it became an iconographic staple for painters through the
ages. Persiles doubles the effect as the heroes escape the burning
northern isle. The elderly Cloelia and the tender Auristela are unable to
keep up, so the strapping barbarian Antonio and Periandro step into
Aeneas’s shoes and sling Cloelia and Auristela across their shoulders.
Cervantes proves fond of variations on this iconic tableau in Persiles.
Earlier, Periandro, dressed bewitchingly as a girl, is hoisted by the
barbarians on their shoulders as soon as he sets foot on their isle. When
the pilgrim party later lands on the island of Golandia, Periandro will
wade ashore with Auristela on his and the two Antonios’ shoulders.
Further on still, Taurisa is borne ashore by her two Christian duellers,
echoing the very moment when Periandro had first seen Transila
brought on barbarian shoulders to meet Arnaldo’s ship. The motif—like
the theme of barbarism itself—penetrates into France when Antonio the
younger raises Félix Flora on his shoulders ‘como a otra nueva
Europa’66 [‘like a new Europa’]. Antonio stands in for Zeus, but ‘the
barbarian’ (henceforth called ‘the courteous one’) twice rescues rather
than rapes the maiden, first from the noble French land-bound corsair
Rubertino and then from river rapids that threaten to drown her.
Characteristically, Cervantes cannot resist inverting the allusion, one
more example of his playfully irreverent way with the literary tradition
in this novel.
Although we are barely five chapters into the first book of what is
often described as the ‘northern’ half of the novel, we are immediately
spirited to Spain and into the past as Antonio and Ricla tell their story
—a pattern of geographic, chronological, and narrative displacement
that recurs as characters trade responsibility for the story through the
‘northern’ Books I and II. There are corresponding geographic
symmetries in the second, southern half, notably the Polish Ortel’s and
the Scottish Ruperta’s tales of fatal love and revenge. The novel’s
prevailing tragicomic note is also sounded in these opening pages, as
contrary (happy and sad) responses are recorded to the present chaos
and to the retrospective tales told by Catholic exiles in the north; and
as the happy escape from the barbarian isle is shadowed by the death
of Auristela’s faithful and life-giving servant, Cloelia.
Even the most tragic tale in the novel, Manuel de Sosa and Leonora
Pereira’s, is subjected to this tonally vacillating treatment. In Book I,
Auristela observes that Manuel’s death spared him the need to explain
how he got to the barbarian isle in the first place. What might be read
as a (naive, wry, or even deflationary) joke about Heliodoran
conventions from the least likeliest of characters (the novel’s standard-
bearer of Christian piety) is nevertheless also an invitation to notice
that Manuel survives the barbarian isle only to die of the memory of his
cruelly public repudiation in Lisbon—Antonio’s putative exemplar of a
Catholic metropolis as we shall see. In Book III, the protagonists visit
Manuel’s tomb in Lisbon and read his epitaph. The Portuguese,
topically cast as fatally lovelorn, are also renowned, says the narrator,
for their witty epitaphs—and Manuel’s own brother promises this one
will please them ‘por discreto y por gracioso’67 [‘for its discernment and
its humour’]. In that spirit, Manuel’s epitaph suggests he would still be
alive if he were not Portuguese. And yet the counterpoint between
Leonora and Manuel’s bivio (convent or marriage?), resolved tragically
in Book I, and Auristela and Periandro’s, resolved comedically in Book
IV, effectively magnifies what is at stake for the heroes in Rome. The
cautionary parallel and the tragic shadow are designed to keep readers
on edge up to the closing moments. But even the happy ending is
overshadowed by Auristela’s crippling doubts about the choice through
the conclusion.
It is a perfect example of Persiles’s generic and tonal elusiveness. The
tragedy and comedy are never pure or categorical, the novel insistently
finding the one in the other. Characters and the narrator will now and
again let slip the Olympian detachment of Heliodorus and tumble into
Ariosto’s (or the Don Quixote narrator’s) unsettlingly impertinent and
high-spirited voice. The effect of the novel’s constant play on
tragicomic registers, its pleasure in wrong-footing readers, is to keep
them (inside and outside the narrative) guessing about whether to
laugh or cry. For some readers, the deflationary moments are liable to
be indecorous and trivializing and even deny the tragedy; for others,
they only deepen the pathos while raising a smile. Characters within
the novel’s world are no less divided in their reactions to the same
events. The narrator repeatedly registers swings, often on the same
page, between ‘desgracias’ or ‘desdichas’ [‘misfortunes’] and ‘dichas’
[‘good fortune’]68 and the laughter and tears both kinds of events call
forth—an uncertainty reflected in the polarizing extremes of scholarly
judgment, prone to circle tirelessly between high (allegorical)
didacticism and ‘mere’ entertainment.69
A 
novel 
so 
ostensibly 
concerned 
with 
exemplarity 
could,
nevertheless, not be more aware of its limits. Ricla’s conversion of the
Spaniard Antonio to the virtues of his own religion never altogether
overcomes his youthful propensity to ‘cólera’ [‘ire’]. This becomes
evident in a crisis involving their son Antonio el bárbaro. Antonio is
twice importuned sexually by older women (Rosamunda and Cenotia)
and mirrors the put-upon heroine Auristela in their aggressively
defended chastity and near-deaths owing to spells or poison (both are
compared to Daphne hounded by Apollo). Antonio mistakenly kills the
inveterate gossip Clodio with an arrow through the tongue meant for
the desperately smitten Cenotia. Dismayed, the elder Antonio advises
him that the perils of unwanted seduction are better headed off by
turning tail rather than by recourse to arms [‘los peligros semejantes no
se remedian con las armas ni con esperar los encuentros, sino con huir
de ellos’]70—advice effectively followed by Periandro in Rome when he
slips out after Hipólita’s assault.
The counterpoint between Antonio and Ricla is a neat little
illustration of Cervantes’s taste for paradox. The ‘human angel’ Antonio
el bárbaro who had earlier rescued the heroes on the barbarian isle is
now described as hot-tempered, impulsive, and dangerously prone to
violence. His epithet becomes a trap for unsuspecting readers inclined
to ascribe this evidence of barbarism to his mother. For in his
touchiness, short temper, and violence the son takes after his Spanish
hidalgo father Antonio before he had met Ricla: the Antonio who
washed up in the north after a fight with another nobleman over modes
of address and who had been tossed from a ship for brawling. In
contrast, Antonio’s barbarian mother is represented from the first as
‘mansa como una cordera’ [‘meek as a lamb’], an image that links her
with Auristela as well as with Christ.71 The younger Antonio tellingly
decides that henceforth he will try not to appear barbarian ‘por
riguroso, ni lascivo, [sino] por manso’ [‘for cruelty or lust [but] for
meekness’], in other words by imitating his barbarian mother rather
than his Spanish father. In Antonio el bárbaro’s heroic rescue of the
strangers we can see to what extent he is his mother’s son, and in his
impetuous and murderous rejection of Cenotia’s advances on
Policarpo’s Island in Book II, his Spanish father’s—tacitly reversing
ordinary expectations.
Characteristically, there is another moral twist to this tale. When the
spurned Cenotia avenges herself by poisoning the younger Antonio, she
stirs the father’s youthful ‘cólera’ (‘ire’) anew. The elder Antonio
threatens ‘con cólera española y discurso ciego’72 [‘with Spanish ire and
blind reasoning’] to kill Cenotia unless she restores his son’s health. The
father’s topically hidalgo response, if an understandable one under the
circumstances, casts an ironic light on the advice he gives his son
following the incident: his account of ‘la ley…católica’ [‘the Catholic…
law’] that ‘enseña que no estamos obligados a castigar a los que nos
ofenden, sino a aconsejarlos la enmienda de sus delitos’ [‘teaches we
are not obliged to punish those who offend us, but rather to counsel
them to mend their ways’]. As Antonio returns from his northern quest
full of wise counsel and a renewed appreciation for the ethical
dimension of Catholicism, there is no hint of magical transformations to
accompany his reintegration into society. Indeed, soon after his
homecoming to Quintanar de la Orden, a deadly fight will cost an
innocent man’s life as he tries to make peace between villagers and
quartered soldiers. Moreover, Antonio’s advice anticipates Periandro’s
to the vengeful Pole Ortel Banedre in Spain, which (though followed)
fails to head off his ultimately tragic destiny in Rome.
On the barbarians’ isle, Cervantes thus boldly prepares the ground
for the religious and ethnic inversions to follow by engaging in a
sequence of literary ones: in lieu of an ancient, sun-kissed
Mediterranean city, the dark, cold, barren wastes of a northern
European island; in lieu of a foreign invasion, a civil war; and in lieu of
the Trojan hero-founder of imperial Rome dutifully rescuing his father,
the cross-dressed epic hero and heroine led by a Spanish-barbarian
mestizo who materializes out of the inky blackness to come to the aid
of strangers. Just as Cervantes recasts the Aeneid by making the
amorous digression the epic adventure of the titular heroes, and Dido
(Cervantes’s 
Sigismunda) 
therefore 
co-protagonist 
rather 
than
dangerous distraction, so too Cervantes recasts the Odyssey by
imagining a would-be conjugal relation (Persiles and Sigismunda’s) and
an actual one (Antonio and Ricla’s) as an itinerant adventure rather
than a parenthesis. There is no abandonment of a Penelope or Calypso
as Persiles and Sigismunda find their way to Rome and as Antonio and
Ricla make their way back to Spain together. If the novel reimagines
the Trojan Aeneas’s imperial quest to found Rome and Odysseus’s
return to Ithaca, so too the same revisionary spirit makes itself known
time and again as a reassertion—sometimes through epic allusion and
always alert to the paradoxes—of a Christian empire of the spirit.
The perspective of northern outsiders shapes not only Persiles’s
rhetoric but also its narrative design and characterization. The
inversion of perspective built into Persiles’s geographic choices helps to
explain an eccentricity that has sometimes baffled readers: the mature
Cervantes’s characteristic weakness for embedding and estranging a
series of novella-like tales through the northern perspective of its
protagonists. One of the more perverse and generative idiosyncrasies of
this ‘historia setentrional’ [‘northern story (or history)’], the novel’s
subtitle, is that more than half features ‘historias meridionales’ or
southern stories (virtually all of Books III and IV, and substantial
retrospective chunks of Books I and II): stories heard in the northern
first half and then directly witnessed by the heroes in the southern
second half.
Cervantes takes even more pleasure than Heliodorus or Lope in the
adventure of telling, listening to, and commenting on stories, whether
remembered or lived directly. He often casts his protagonists as
theatricalized spectators, the most conspicuous case being Ruperta’s in
Book III. Heliodorus sometimes delegates to secondary characters
(notably Gnemon and Calasiris) but ensures their tales are closely
related to the main action. As in all of his late fiction, Cervantes tests
the limits of variety in Persiles by incorporating no less than fourteen
secondary characters who tell their own stories.73
Although the generic framework established initially is that of
characteristic Heliodoran adventures set in the north (with their marine
landscapes, island pitstops, sudden squalls, mistaken identity, false
deaths, recognition scenes, shipwreck, corsairs, abductions, and
captivity), already by Chapter 4 of Book I these yield to the adventure
of the strange, novel, and marvellous stories about the past, whose
conflicts originate in the (apparently) familiar world of Spain, Italy,
Portugal, and France. They feature barbarities effectively rooted in
national topoi such as the rural Spanish hidalgo’s honour-sensitive
punctiliousness (Antonio); Italian lust, guile, and mendacity (Rutilio);
Portuguese 
fatal 
lovesickness 
(Manuel); 
and 
French 
noble
disputatiousness (Renato). They are cautionary variations on the
protagonists’ own tale resulting from realized, threatened, imposed,
denied, or rumoured erotic love (natural, illicit, misdirected, or chaste),
in tension with a norm (duty or honour) or with competing loyalties
(parental, filial, and fraternal love; friendship; monastic vocation;
charity; and political obligation). Tales about what prompted the
northern exodus of Catholic characters, they invariably give the topoi a
humanizing (because surprising) twist.
They also reveal how Cervantes’s Heliodoran gambit staked its
appeal to readers on exploring intensely debated vital choices while
refusing easy solutions: for example, between arranged and clandestine
matrimony, between matrimony and monasticism, and between
decorum or honour and freedom or even life.74 If Antonio teaches Ricla
a lesson in Catholic doctrine, even as they embody an ideal Christian
marriage outside of the Church’s institutional orbit, the barbarian Ricla
teaches the Spaniard a lesson in Christian charity. Rutilio’s tall-tale
about a Roman sorceress who bears him to Norway on a flying carpet
and is transformed into a she-wolf expresses a truth about his own
sexual adventurism as well as Livy’s account of Rome’s foundation
story. Leonor makes use of clandestine matrimony—proscribed by
Trent—with Christ in order to escape a match (with Manuel) imposed
against her will by her father. At the same time, her (and especially
Manuel’s) decorous silence might well be the chief cause of their tragic
end. Renato and Eusebia appear to embrace the ascetic and bucolic life
in their isle of Hermits exile from the French court for crimes they
never committed. However, as soon as they are pardoned through a
chance death-bed confession they waste no time in returning to the
court that had unjustly exiled them in the first place.
Even when the Heliodoran pattern of adventure reasserts itself (as in
the interstices of Clodio and Rosamunda’s and Transila and Mauricio’s
stories, about exiles from the English court and an island near Hibernia,
or in Periandro’s epic and perhaps largely made-up retrospective
narrative at Policarpo’s court), we are plunged back into the southern
world through Renato’s tale of woe at the French court in Book II. The
counterpoint never lets up: even on Policarpo’s isle, the Granadan
morisca Cenotia reminds us of that other only apparently remote world.
In effect, the apparent way of perfection that leads the northern
heroes to Rome reveals itself to be—time and again—reversible. There is
no more compelling example of that playful reversibility than
Feliciana’s story.75 At the narrative midpoint between the barbarian isle
and Rome (just where Lope de Vega ties up his Greek novel),
Extremadura threatens to recapitulate the fratricidal war among
barbarians that devastates the northern isle in Book I. In the north, it is
Bradamiro’s at once courageous and arrogant disregard for the
barbarians’ ‘leyes del vaticinio’76 [‘laws of the prophecy’] that pits his
supporters against those of the barbarian captain, which in turn leads
to the island’s destruction by fire. The corresponding trigger in
Extremadura is Feliciana and Rosanio’s clandestine marriage. Feliciana
is murderously pursued by her father and brothers for choosing her
own husband without paternal blessing and for bearing his child in
secret.
What is extraordinary is how Cervantes has the barbarian isle erupt
in Extremadura—not least because it belies the suspicion of negligence
that has sometimes haunted his writing. The echoes can be heard in:
(1) the rhetoric of the marvellous (the northern ‘estraña novedad’77
[‘strange novelty’] answered by the Extremaduran ‘estraño suceso’ or
‘estraño acontecimiento’ [‘strange event’ or ‘strange occurence’]); (2)
the shared mise-en-scène (the dark and menacing night; the goat and
sheep skins to adorn both Antonio and Ricla’s northern cave and the
Extremaduran oxherd’s holm oak; the use of daggers as weapons); and
(3) the shared motifs of miraculous rescue and embodied or human
angels.
More strikingly, both conflicts are described morally in identical
terms: as a fratricidal dispute driven by ‘la cólera’ [‘ire’] and ‘la
venganza’ [‘revenge’], which set parents against children and siblings
against each other.78 The rhetorical estrangement of the familiar
everywhere seen in Persiles is particularly suited to frame an episode
about the nobility turned against itself.
A key instance of this moral irony is the corresponding play on the
geography of vice and virtue. Antonio the Spaniard throws down the
rhetorical gauntlet upon sailing into Lisbon harbour, announcing one of
the novel’s more charged religious themes: the complex relation
between charity and ceremony. He declares to his barbarian wife Ricla:
Agora sabrás, bárbara mía, del modo que has de servir a Dios…agora
verás los ricos templos en que es adorado; verás juntamente las
católicas ceremonias con que se sirve y notarás cómo la caridad
cristiana está en su punto…Aquí…la cortesía no deja que se le llegue la
arrogancia.79
[Now, my barbarian, you will learn just how you must serve God…now
you will see the rich shrines in which he is worshipped; you will also
see the Catholic ceremonies by which he is served and how Christian
charity is brought to perfection…Here…courtesy does not tolerate
arrogance.]
This idealized vision of Antonio’s (who apparently forgets the tragic
story of Manuel and Leonora set in the same city, as well as Ricla’s own
exemplarity)80 is almost immediately called into question in relation to
the novel’s Spain by Feliciana herself. Fleeing her father and brothers,
Feliciana seeks charity and courtesy precisely in the northerners: ‘“así,
me hallo como me veo, merced a vuestra caridad y cortesía”’81 [‘“And
so, I find myself like this thanks to your charity and courtesy”’].
Rosanio too ironically echoes Antonio as he crosses paths with the
Nordic and barbarian heroes and urgently appeals for help. On the run
and desperate to safeguard the infant, Rosanio wonders: If there is
charity and courtesy in foreign lands, there must be compassionate
souls everywhere.82 The question implicitly raised by the episode is
where the ideals of charity and courtesy voiced by Antonio and Rosanio
are to be found in the lands of the Virgin of Guadalupe.
The answer to that question is often the novel’s north. The
penetration of the barbarian isle in southern lands takes place not only
for the worse but also for the better. If the ‘cólera’ [‘ire’], ‘venganza’
[‘revenge’], ‘arrogancia’ [‘arrogance’], ‘menosprecio de la ley’
[‘disregard for the law’], and fratricidal war of the barbarian isle break
out routinely in the novel’s Catholic world, its northern black-sheep
heroes (the barbarians Ricla, Antonio the son, and Constanza and the
Nordic princes Periandro and Auristela) figure among the novel’s chief
avatars of charity and courtesy. We are shown not so much utopian
places as egregious characters. Notwithstanding their (more comic than
tragic) faults, the Nordic heroes are no less exceptional in their war-
ravaged homelands than Ricla is on her barbaric isle.
The barbarian Ricla, who, together with her daughter Constanza,
might well be the only major character free of obvious moral flaws,
replays her salvific Book I role in Book III. She does so by being
insistently associated with charity and compassion (along with her gifts
as a treasurer) first toward the Spanish castaway Antonio; then toward
the Nordic princes on the barbarian isle; and now toward the tierra
firme castaways Feliciana, Rosanio, and the abandoned child in
Extremadura. Rosanio entrusts the newborn child and a gold chain for
safekeeping to her because, the narrator recognizes, she is a ‘mujer
compasiva’ [‘compassionate woman’].83 The Extremaduran oxherd
manifestly takes up where Ricla leaves off: ‘Ricla…se llegó al pastor
caritativo, diciéndole: “No pongáis, buen señor, término a vuestra
caridad y usalda con esta criatura que tengo en los brazos, antes que
perezca de hambre”’ [‘Ricla…approached the oxherd, saying: “Do not,
good sir, put an end to your charity and use it with the infant I bear in
my arms, before it perishes of hunger’”]. The oxherd had already
anticipated her, offering to take Feliciana in: ‘“Nuestra diligencia…
mostrará que tenemos caridad”’ [‘“Our diligence…will prove we are
charitable”’].
Ricla mirrors Feliciana in more than one register: in the way each
takes charge of telling her own story, in the elegant circumlocutions
they use to affirm their sexual initiations, and in marrying without
ceremony. This sympathy between Ricla and Feliciana coincides with a
notable structural change in the second (southern) half of the novel.
Book III marks the ascendancy of Auristela’s over Periandro’s lead and
more broadly of female over male protagonism in the secondary stories
of Feliciana, Luisa, Ambrosia, Rafala, Ruperta, Isabela, and Hipólita.
The upshot is that Extremadura’s unholy family finds sanctuary
among foreign pilgrims and local oxherds, who do not care that
Feliciana and Rosanio are officially unmarried and the baby
unbaptized. If the road to Roma (Rome) is morally reversible, no
surprise then that now and again (as on the barbarian isle and in the
Feliciana episode) the journey’s end should be novelistically embodied
in the exercise of Amor (love).
Periandro had already shown himself the mirror of courtesy that
Antonio associates with Lisbon, as captain of the corsair ship that
searches for Auristela. His magnanimity toward Sulpicia following a
failed attempt at rape and theft by her servants earns him this
judgment: ‘“Este mancebo es un sujeto donde tiene su asiento la suma
cortesía”’84 [‘“This youth is a person in whom the utmost courtesy has
its home”’]. Even if Periandro invents the story (we have no other
witnesses), Feliciana wastes no time in confirming the judgment,
‘aficionada’ [‘fond’] as the narrator says she is of ‘la cortesía de
Periandro’ [‘Periandro’s courtesy’]. She, Rosanio, and the baby thus
find charity and courtesy where, according to Antonio, we might least
expect it. In a pastoral Extremadura that recalls at once the savagery
and the bucolic idealism of the novel’s barbarian north, the bucolic
ideal is located in the northern heroes and the Extremaduran oxherds,
and the savagery in the local nobility.
This ironic pattern (regarding the Christian virtue of the novel’s
noble characters) is enacted as well by the Spanish hidalgo Antonio
before he meets the barbarian Ricla; by Taurisa’s Christian ‘caballero’
[‘gentlemen’] suitors; by the French lords Libsomiro and Renato; and
by the Danish prince Arnaldo and the French Duke Nemurs in Rome.
All are faithful practitioners of what the narrator sardonically calls ‘la
intricada se[c]ta del duelo’85 [‘the twisted sect of the duel’], as if it
were a heresy. And indeed the novel makes a point—on the Isla Nevada
[the Snowy Isle]—of indirectly reminding readers that the Church had
repeatedly condemned duels. The sailors are said, like good Catholics,
to deny the dead suitors a Christian burial.86 In Book III, the French
lord Rubertino—a kind of corsair on land and avatar of the northern
barbarian Bradamiro—is so wedded to his ‘gusto’ that he tries to abduct
Félix Flora before he is struck down by Antonio el bárbaro’s arrow.
The suggestion of a transfer of virtues from the novel’s barbarian
and Nordic north to its Catholic south may well account for the
relatively comedic, festive, and forgiving tone of Book III. As we have
seen, it could be explained by the presence of these heroic northern
witnesses just as well as by the increasing proximity of the novel’s
Rome: by their loving aura in the second, present-oriented half of the
novel in contrast to the harsher past (tending to tragic) stories told in
the first half about the south.87 It also illustrates how the novel’s
governing peregrinatio vitae trope, life as an exile on Earth, operates in
Persiles not only on a metaphysical, existential, or amorous plane, but
also on a social or political one. Estrangement from the community of
origin is a recurring theme. The northerners’ pilgrimage to Rome is
answered in the reverse direction by the northern exodus of the
Spaniard Antonio, the Portuguese Manuel, the Italian Rutilio, and the
Frenchman Renato, among others—and for reasons similar to
Feliciana’s.
The text thereby raises doubts continually about the sense of the
road to Rome, whether it is a step forward or a retreat, a step toward
light, liberation, and love or a return to actions, landscapes, and
characters seen already for better and for worse in the north. It thus
relativizes Auristela’s (as she herself eventually recognizes, dashed)
hopes for the safety of ‘tierra firme’ [‘dry land’] and ‘España pacífica’
[‘peaceful Spain’], as well as the promised land idealized by the
barbarian family upon entry to Lisbon.88 Grace in Persiles tends to be
less the prerogative of places, institutions, or communities than of
quasi-miraculous exceptions to the rule.
The northern origin of the protagonists, their simultaneous condition
as outsiders and Catholics, is a key source for the ironizing effect of the
neolucianesque faux naïf. Tasso famously recommended northern
Europe—today’s Scandinavia—as one of the three most apt locations
with the East and West Indies (Asia and America) to situate marvels
without straining plausibility.89 We have already seen that Persiles turns
this neo-Aristotelian kind of thinking on its head, delighting also in the
marvels of Europe’s Catholic heartland. We might still want to know
why Cervantes would choose northern Europe over the East or West
Indies. One possibility is the play it offered on so-called neogothicism.
This historiographic and political tradition provides an important clue
to understanding the protagonism of northern characters. It might even
make sense of a detail that has disconcerted more than a few readers:
why the northern heroes are perceived (and happily pass themselves
off) as Spaniards once they cross into France and Italy from Spain in
Book III.90
We should recall that Persiles’s tutor Serafido describes the northern
prince’s homeland as an island at the most remote limit of Norway,
held to be the last on earth near the North Pole. The name of Persiles’s
isle, says Serafido, is Tile ‘“a quien Virgilio llamó Tule en aquellos
versos que dicen, en el libro I Geórg:…ac tua nautae / numina sola
colant: tibi serviat ultima Thule”’ [‘“whom Virgil called Thule in those
verses that read in Book I of the Georgics:…and may the seafarers /
revere only your numina: and far Thule serve you’”].91 Whatever else they
do, the Georgics mark the limits of empire. As James Romm has written:
‘[Thule’s] far-westerly location held a strong historical significance for
the Romans, a people who portrayed their own arrival on the stage of
history as a migration from a collapsing East to an unspoiled Italian
“Hesperia”’.92
Thule’s fame as a hoary commonplace for the blessed and unspoiled
edge of the Roman world makes it all the more interesting that
Cervantes would embed the reference in Virgil’s lines—as if he were
inviting us to compare the two. In the Georgics the Roman poet
naturally takes the view of his patron and ruler, Caesar Augustus, who
looks out from Rome on his world as far as Thule. Cervantes’s novel
takes the view of farthest Thule (the text’s Tile) by way of prince
Persiles. He looks back at Rome and rather than serve (as in Virgil),
conquers the city on the Tiber by his guile, courtesy, and steadfastness.
Tile’s Caesar in Persiles is Periandro’s older brother, Maximino.
Serafido, echoing their mother Queen Eustoquia, describes Maximino as
coarse, loathsome, and caught up in continual warfare with his
enemies.93 Maximino in this light would appear to stand in for
conventional epic hero priorities, although at the end he will show
political responsibility and even compassion. But the novel’s
sympathies lie with and the main action is about his upstart brother
and— by the novel’s end—successor, Persiles.
The gesture of poetic renewal, linked to the displacement of epic
arms, can be traced even in the most unexpected episodes. We might
recall the visit to the Roman museum of a papal monsignor.94 The poet-
pilgrim explains it to Periandro: the most extraordinary museum in the
world because it gathers portraits [‘tablas’] of future poets. He points
out two, of the Italian Torquato Tasso and the Spaniard Francisco
López de Zárate. Let us set aside the banal, quasi-tautological praise the
monsignor directs to Zárate’s Cruz y Constantino [The Cross and
Constantine]: ‘poema verdaderamente heroico y religioso, y digno del
nombre de poema’ [‘a truly heroic and religious poem, well worth
calling a poem’]. What is so striking is the marked yet tacit contrast in
matter with Cervantes’s ‘prose epic’, as the neo-Aristotelian El Pinciano
called its model the Aethiopica. Tasso and Zárate sing of crusades and
wars: Gerusalemme liberata [Jerusalem Liberated] in the First Crusade;
the ‘invención de la cruz, con las guerras del emperador Constantino’
[‘discovery of the cross, with the wars of the emperor Constantine’] in
Cruz y Constantino.
If the monsignor’s paragons were Cervantes’s, we might expect
Persiles to celebrate the wars of King Maximino and relegate the love
theme, the habitual gesture of epic. Instead, we get the reverse:
assuming we take El Pinciano’s ‘prose epic’ designation for the
Aethiopica as a creative opportunity for Cervantes and remember there
is no equivalent for Maximino’s role in Heliodorus, we will be prepared
to recognize how Cervantes has heightened the epic presence in Persiles
only to make more explicit the novel’s repudiation of the priority of
arms.95 Cervantes’s ‘prose epic’, sooner an anti-epic in this light, sings
the victory of the second-born lover over the elder warrior brother. The
self-described sardonic [‘socarrón’] Cervantes might be intuited behind
Persiles’s triumph. Its world turned upside down assumes the
ascendancy of second-borns over first-borns, mothers over fathers,
marriage choice over arranged marriage, and guile over force.96 It’s a
lyrically inflected heroism that, as such, puts courtesy before coarseness
and love before arms.
Serafido, however, also offers a different, historical gloss on Tile,
declaring that ‘agora’ [‘now’] (that is, more or less between 1557 and
1559 or 1606) Tile is ‘vulgarmente’ [‘commonly’] called Islanda [sic] or
Iceland.97 On these novelistic dates the historical Iceland (with the rest
of Norway) was under Danish rule. Denmark had, by 1537, established
Lutheranism. Nevertheless, although the narrator alleges that in the
northern kingdoms ‘la verdadera fe católica no está en el punto tan
perfecto como se requiere’98 [‘the true Catholic faith is not quite at the
peak of perfection called for’], they appear nevertheless to defer to the
religious authority of Rome. The journey to Rome arranged by
Persiles’s mother is not presented as a transgression of a state religion
other than Catholicism. Rather it is described as an end run around the
decorum Persiles owes his older brother and heir to the kingdom,
Maximino—who had already requested that Sigismunda be his bride.
Thus the northern homelands of the protagonists retain their at-once
quasi-legendary and quasi-historical valences: (1) in Persiles’s case, the
classical Thule (Tile in the text) prevails but coexists with the historical
Iceland (Islanda in the text); (2) in Sigismunda’s case, the island
kingdom of Friesland (Frislanda in the text) still appeared as an island
in maps of 1617, but its existence as an independent kingdom was an
invention. One advantage of this dual condition is that Cervantes could
more overtly signal his rewriting of Virgil. The inversion of perspective
with respect to the Georgics—like the implicit play on Amor and Roma
and the reversal of Virgil’s epic priorities (putting Periandro’s love
before Maximino’s wars)—is figured geographically by Thule’s moral
displacement of Rome.99 Another advantage is that by subordinating
the historical Iceland to the legendary Thule, the great physical and
spiritual distances traversed could play out plausibly in a novelistic
space whose dominant official religion is Catholicism. Third, by not
letting Tile swallow up Islanda altogether, Cervantes could nevertheless
feature Nordic heroes whose language is Norwegian and yet not
sacrifice verisimilitude. This, in turn, allows the novel to exploit one of
its more delicious, and paradoxical, subtexts—Swedish as well as
Spanish neogothicism—once more confounding extremes and bridging
the distance between the novel’s north and south.
The two most renowned sixteenth-century authorities on the history,
natural marvels, and customs of the northern European lands were the
Swedish and Catholic brothers exiled in Rome, Johannes and Olaus
Magnus. Olaus Magnus’s Historia de Gentibus Septentrionalibus [History
of the Northern Peoples], published in Rome in 1555, is widely
acknowledged to be one of Cervantes’s likely primary sources on the
novel’s north.100 However, the Magnus brothers’ importance as
authorities on the landscapes, customs, and political history of the
northern lands may well have obscured the irony of their authorial
position. They were also the leading advocates of the Gothicist
revival.101 They devoted their lives to restoring Sweden to Catholicism
and to celebrating the Gothic conquest and purification of (historical
and current) Roman corruption, now spiritual. They therefore imagined
themselves as incarnations at once of the Roman restoration of Sweden
and the Gothic renewal of Rome. For that reason they refer to
themselves at every turn sooner as Goths than as Swedes.
Olaus Magnus scholars Peter Fisher and Peter Foote observe:
Olaus has high esteem for Spartans and Romans, but still greater
reverence for the tough, honest, clean-living Goths, his countrymen’s
ancestors, whose achievements had been described and lauded in his
brother’s Historia de omnibus Gothorum Sueonumque regibus (History of
the Gothic and Swedish Kings). They were not the barbarian vandals
pictured by the Italian humanists, but a race of men who embraced
justice and piety and liberated the Mediterranean lands from corrupt,
oppressive rulers. A counter-movement soon sprang up among German
humanists, encouraged by the Reformation and wide-spread anti-Italian
sentiment. Turning to the authentic early sources, they sought to
rehabilitate the Goths and claimed them as their noble and heroic
ancestors. Their ideas were stimulated by the rediscovery of Tacitus’s
Germania, first published in Venice in 1470, in which the author had
deliberately depicted the German tribes as uncorrupted [sic] and manly,
implicitly comparing them with his effete Roman contemporaries.102
In this light we can see why Cervantes might have taken a special
interest in what the Magnus brothers embodied politically and not
merely in the stray facts (marvellous oddities such as sea serpents,
maiden pirates, or the use of skis) they purveyed about northern
lands.103
Christian virtue in Persiles’s Rome is indeed best exemplified by the
northern heroes (‘Goths’, the Magnus brothers would say), although
from lands where the true Catholic faith is said (by the narrator) to be
less than perfect. In the course of her big reveal Auristela teaches a
lesson in repentance, a virtue preached by the Vatican’s penitentiaries
that more than once is said to elude her Roman rival Hipólita.104
Auristela finally summons the courage to embrace it as she makes the
decisive (and for Periandro, life-and-death) choice between marriage
and the convent. The revelatory step is compared, strikingly, to the
effect of waking from a bad dream. Auristela is divided, poignantly, to
the end about the choice. But in lending herself to it, she nobly makes
possible a happy rather than tragic ending for Periandro. Auristela’s not
altogether resolved grappling with her contrary impulses in Rome
brings home how much of the drama of the second, southern half of the
novel is defined by the vitality and inner struggles of a large cast of
morally complex, powerful, and often theatrically self-fashioning
female characters such as Feliciana, Luisa, Ambrosia, Rafala, Ruperta,
Isabela, and Hipólita.
The protagonists undertake a journey to a city that holds out the
promise of instruction in the faith and delivers a display of official
justice marred by homicidal assaults and rampant corruption. The
degrading pull of that earthly Rome is so powerful even they get caught
up in it, as when they rescue their homicidal servant Bartolomé and his
lover Luisa. Auristela is poisoned by order of her rival Hipólita,
Periandro nearly killed by his rival the ruffian Pirro. Pirro echoes the
northern barbarians’ sacrificial law by running a sword through the
prince’s shoulder. A major symbolic act of the book is to show
humanity on the margins and barbarity in the heartlands of
Christianity, especially in Rome. This decentring vision of Catholic
Europe makes Cervantes heir to a perception shared not only by Lucian
but also more immediately by Antonio de Guevara, Bartolomé de las
Casas, and Michel de Montaigne (who had read Guevara).
As we saw, Tacitus had long since established the primitivist picture
of (putatively exemplary) Germanic barbarians meant to chastise
degenerate Rome for straying from its founding virtues. In Spain, the
spirit of Tacitus was famously revived in the sixteenth century by
Antonio de Guevara in the Relox de príncipes (1529), a princely mirror
in the form of a mildly mocking pseudo-history of the emperor Marcus
Aurelius. Readers will recall the extraordinary parable of the ‘Villano
del Danubio’ [‘The Danubian Peasant’], in which the poor German
peasant of the title upbraids the Roman senate for failing to uphold its
own self-professed classical virtues and for allowing tyranny,
expropriation, and exploitation to sully its name. Not a few scholars
have recognized the thinly veiled allegory for the imperial Spain whose
monarchy trumpeted its exclusive inheritance of the Roman mantle.
However, as is well-known, the Goths and the Gothic carried highly
charged political meanings in Spain.105 Cervantes’s tragedy La
Numancia reminds us that the Spanish royal houses had long promoted
their ancestral connection with the Visigoths, a link sustained by legend
and chronicle. The Spanish Gothic past and the widely known topos of
the ‘último godo’ [‘last Goth’] had acquired the status of a foundational
myth by the sixteenth century. The ‘último godo’ refers to Rodrigo, the
last Visigothic king to rule Spain and cause—in the popular
imagination represented by ballad tradition—of Christian Spain’s ‘loss’
to the Islamic invasion of 711. One of the purposes of the Gothic myth
was to bracket the Islamic presence in Spain and affirm the continuity
of Christianity before and after the Muslim invasion—a drive that
would eventually extend to the (baptized) moriscos, whose expulsion in
1609 is proleptically anticipated in Persiles’s Book III.106 Phillip II even
gave his heir—born in 1578— a second name after the Visigothic
martyr-saint Hermenegildo.107 Cervantes scholars have studied the
theme largely in relation to the Rodrigo and Zoraida episode in Don
Quixote.108 However, it was a subject of literary reflection for Cervantes
from Numancia to Persiles, where he offers his most far-reaching (and
entertaining) response to its political manipulation.
The encounter between the northern protagonists (or Goths,
according to the Magnus brothers) and the Visigothic legacy of Toledo
is a paradigmatic moment of that Lucianic gaze, between naive and
sardonic, that structures Persiles. In Book III the princes approach
Toledo and Madrid but conspicuously fail to visit no less than the seats
respectively of the primate of the Spanish Church and the court of the
ruling Spanish Habsburg dynasty. The decision is all the more striking
insofar as they do visit other cities such as Lisbon, Badajoz, Barcelona,
Perpignan, Milan, Lucca, and Rome. The narrator alleges Antonio the
Spaniard’s urgent desire to return home after many years of exile on
the barbarian isle, Toledo’s too numerous to be rushed ‘grandezas’
[‘monuments’], and their fear of ‘algún estorbo’ [‘some impediment’] in
Madrid.109 Toledo is carefully admired from a distance, as if by a
narrative ten-foot pole, and Madrid is dismissed with only a casual
joke. If the novel takes part in the dispute over the rival claims of the
former royal residence (Toledo) and the new one (Madrid), neither
comes off well.
Periandro allows himself a comment on Toledo that calls to mind
the critical response to political mythmaking earlier exemplified by
Antonio de Guevara. Seized by a traveller’s fit of awestruck praise in
view of the great rocky crag of Toledo (his ‘peñascosa pesadumbre’),110
he calls the city ‘gloria de España y luz de sus ciudades, en cuyo seno
han estado guardadas por infinitos siglos las reliquias de los valientes
godos para volver a resucitar su muerta gloria, y a ser claro espejo y
depósito de católicas ceremonias!’ [‘“glory of Spain and light of its
cities, in whose bosom the relics of the brave Goths have been stored
for endless centuries awaiting the day when their dead glory will be
revived and will serve as a clear mirror and storehouse of Catholic
ceremonies”’]. For the hero, the former imperial capital is apparently a
kind of giant monstrance for the relics of the Goths, a place where
ceremonies are celebrated. His comment suggests that the legacy of the
Goths so prized by the Habsburgs was moribund (‘su muerta gloria’)
and pending revival, we cannot be sure whether affirming or denying a
dynastic propaganda that insisted the Habsburgs represented the
definitive Gothic restoration in Spain.
We saw already that Antonio promised Ricla the occasion to witness
in Lisbon ‘las católicas ceremonias con que se sirve [Dios] y…cómo la
caridad cristiana está en su punto’ [‘“the Catholic ceremonies by which
[God] 
is 
served 
and…how 
Christian 
charity 
is 
brought 
to
perfection”’].111 By contrast Periandro’s speech—which looks like
praise of Toledo—refers to ceremonies but omits charity. No surprise
that, following the tragic episode of Manuel and Leonora in Lisbon,
Periandro should have given up hope of finding charity in places where
ceremony reigns. What merits underlining is that, much as Toledo is
called an ‘espejo y depósito de católicas ceremonias’, the northern
pilgrims distinguish themselves as we have seen precisely as ‘espejos y
depósitos’ of Catholic charity.112
However, since Cervantes invariably gives with one hand and takes
away with the other, Toledo is also indirectly celebrated for midwifing
an alternative to its own dead glory of Gothic relics and ceremonies:
the religion of lyric poetry and the ideal of courtesy embodied by
Garcilaso de la Vega.113 A native of Toledo, Garcilaso de la Vega serves
as an alter ego for both the novel’s hero and Cervantes, known for his
oft-remarked ‘cult of Garcilaso’:114 as the ideal soldier-poet and
courtier, the classicizing innovator, and the prince of Spanish verse
open to the best of native, classical, and Italian traditions. Maximino
and Periandro appear to divide between themselves the arms and
letters bound up with the figure of the soldier-poet. Periandro’s
identification with Garcilaso is constant. He cites him three times over
the course of the novel from his fortuitous reunion with Auristela on
the barbaric isle.115 The narrator confirms Periandro is a devoted
reader of Garcilaso (‘visto, leído, mirado y admirado’ [‘seen, read,
examined, and admired’]) and of ‘los antiguos poetas’ [‘the classical
poets’] in Latin. The latter is a widespread taste, he tells us, among the
most distinguished denizens of the north.116 As soon as Periandro lays
eyes on Garcilaso’s Tagus river, he presents himself as a poor pilgrim
who has come to revere its legendary golden sands.
The fullest evocation of Garcilaso appears as the pilgrims approach
Toledo. The sight moves Periandro to recall the poet’s Egloga I. Even in
homage, Periandro is the paragon of poetic emulation. He rewrites his
model declaring a beginning rather than an end: ‘“No diremos: ‘Aquí
dio fin a su cantar Salicio’, sino: ‘Aquí dio principio a su cantar
Salicio’”117 [‘“We will not say: ‘Here Salicio brought an end to his song,
rather: ‘Here Salicio gave a beginning to his song’”]. Responding to
Garcilaso’s city- and river-scape in order better to celebrate him,
Periandro directly identifies the poet with Salicio (Garcilaso’s pastoral
mask) and both implicitly (through their power to move nature) with
Orpheus.
The narrator pointedly draws attention to the fact that Periandro
knows Garcilaso better than Antonio the Spaniard (although he too is
from Toledo) because he is a reader: ‘Esto dijo Periandro, que lo dijera
mejor Antonio el padre, si tan bien como él lo supiera, porque las
lecciones de los libros muchas veces hacen más cierta esperiencia de las
cosas que no la tienen los mismos que las han visto’118 [‘This is what
Periandro said, although Antonio the father would have said it better, if
he knew it as well, because the reading of books often makes for a
surer experience of things unavailable even to those who have merely
seen them’]. The narrator’s immediate gloss makes a point of
explaining that reading is a vital experience: ‘el que lee con atención
repara una y muchas veces en lo que va leyendo, y el que mira sin ella
no repara en nada y, con esto, excede la lección a la vista’ [‘those who
read attentively linger time and again on what they are reading, and
those who look without reading notice nothing and, for that reason,
reading surpasses looking’]. Unlike Periandro the reader, Antonio does
not know the work of the Spanish Renaissance poet par excellence any
more than he understood the virtues (among others, charity) rather
than the doctrine of his religion before he met Ricla on the barbarian
isle in the north.
The contrast here is with the hidalgo Spaniard Antonio, but in the
tale that Periandro spins at Policarpo’s court (Book II) we are shown
how the devotion to Garcilaso also distinguishes him from his rival, the
Danish Prince Arnaldo. At Princess Sinforosa’s request, Periandro
explains how he landed on the isle. Among his exploits, he includes
(without warning) a dream. It features Chastity disguised as Auristela
when she was captive, and he was desperately searching for her,
although she now finds herself in the audience. In the course of this
alleged vision he claims he had wanted to say to her ‘¡Oh ricas prendas,
por mi bien halladas!’119 [‘Oh, rich tokens to my good fortune found!’].
But he was so moved by what he saw, he snapped out of the dream and
the lovely vision vanished.
Periandro draws on Garcilaso to lend a voice, in masked form, to his
concealed love for Auristela. In passing he mocks the love secret,
Arnaldo, and Mauricio. He makes strategic use of his ‘dream’ thanks to
the garbled first line of Garcilaso’s Sonnet X, the renowned allusion to
an absent beloved (‘Oh dulces prendas por mi mal halladas’ [‘Oh sweet
tokens to my misfortune found’]). Lexicalized to the point of cliché in
1617, it was perfectly recognizable in its straightforward sense to any
reader of the poet. At the same time it paraphrases Dido’s last words, as
all of Garcilaso’s commentators in the period noted, when she looks on
the departed Aeneas’s belongings and prepares to take her life.
This is no small feat. Periandro manages to declare his love openly
to his supposed sister without disclosing the true nature (for now,
necessarily a secret) of their relation—save for readers of Garcilaso.
The inversion (Garcilaso’s ‘mal’ [‘misfortune’] transformed into
Periandro’s ‘bien’ [‘good fortune’]) is not arbitrary. Periandro rewrites
Garcilaso’s lament for the absent Petrarchan lady as well as Virgil’s for
the hero’s abandonment. In doing so, he breaks a lance for the happy
ending, a presence (Auristela) with a voice of her own. Like all happy
endings, it will come at a price. The scapegoat will be the providential
death of their chief obstacle, Periandro’s brother Maximino, in Rome.
As if to ensure we do not miss the artful deception, the reactions are
swift. Mauricio, the often captious, pedantic, and preening rationalist
astrologer, explains the confusion caused by Periandro, suggesting it
could all be a lie.120 And yet precisely what Periandro has succeeded in
expressing is the truth of his relation to Auristela, the truth that most
interests Arnaldo. Arnaldo’s response, in turn, gives us the measure of
his shortcomings as a rival. The narrator says he scrutinized Periandro’s
expression closely as he told his story but could not settle once and for
all the suspicion that Clodio the slanderer had insinuated into his heart,
namely that Auristela and Periandro were not really siblings. And yet if
Arnaldo were a reader of dreams (and especially now, of Garcilaso) he
would have the answer to his doubts about Periandro and Auristela.
Instead, he asks Periandro to get back to explaining how he landed on
Policarpo’s isle, only ‘sin repetir sueños’ [‘skip the dreams’].121 He asks
him, that is, to get to the point that had prompted the hero’s long,
retrospective narrative in the first place, missing the very point that
most interests Arnaldo.
That ability to read texts and minds would, we later learn, spare
Arnaldo the long, arduous, and apparently fruitless voyage to Rome.
Periandro’s dream (and perhaps lie) thus associates poetry with the
oracular force of a higher truth. As the narrator earlier explained it,
attentive reading cultivates in us a capacity to grasp experience beyond
the enthrallment to appearances—a tendency represented by Arnaldo
(despite his devotion to both heroes) from the beginning. Even in Rome
he fights Nemurs in a duel over Auristela’s portrait,122 although the
princess confirms her interest in neither. Periandro’s brother, and rival,
Maximino only knows her through a portrait. Periandro, by contrast,
appears not to confuse possession of the portrait with possession of
Auristela: he twice declares that her portrait belongs to her.
Periandro’s explanations for his apparent carelessness offer a key to
his self-fashioning as a hero. He neither denies nor withdraws his
dream, understood as a heroic feat. First, he affirms ‘todos mis bienes
son soñados’123 [‘all my blessings are dreamed’]. And then he invokes
his ‘gusto’ [‘pleasure or preference’]: ‘El gusto de lo que soñé…me hizo
no advertir de cuán poco fruto son las digresiones en cualquiera
narración, cuando ha de ser sucinta y no dilatada’ [‘The pleasure in my
dream…kept me from noticing how fruitless digressions are in any tale,
when it must be succinct and not drawn out’]. In doing so, he intimates
a secret complicity with a goddess (Sensualidad [Sensuality]) who in
the same dream would appear otherwise just to threaten him: ‘costarte
ha generoso mancebo el ser mi enemigo, si no la vida, a lo menos el
gusto’ [‘it will cost you, noble youth, to be my enemy; if not your life,
then at least your pleasure’]. Through the shared keyword of ‘gusto’
[‘pleasure or preference’], the episode invites us to recognize the
analogous challenge—to negotiate decorum and pleasure—in the
amorous (Periandro’s love for Auristela) and in the poetic
(verisimilitude and coherence in the telling of his tale). Mauricio and
Arnaldo thereby become surrogates for readers tested by the narrative:
in particular their willingness and ability to recognize pertinence where
there is an apparent digression and truth (in this case, an amorous one)
where there is an apparent lie. Although scholars have been more
inclined to believe Cervantes sympathizes with Periandro’s critics
(Mauricio and Arnaldo), the episode reminds us that in his late works
all mockers are liable to be mocked—Periandro here openly by
Mauricio and Arnaldo, Mauricio and Arnaldo covertly by Periandro.
No surprise then that Periandro will later have this particularly
artful display of guile (he at once keeps and breaks the lover’s
obligatory seal of silence) included among the heroes’ labours in the
painting commissioned in Lisbon (Book III)—tellingly, a decision
unquestioned by the narrator.124 Periandro and Auristela thus recast
the epic ethos by turning it toward lyric and by lending the erotic
(associated with dream and poetry) a heroic dimension through
conjugal love.125 Garcilaso’s soldier-poet ideal, with its courtly fusion of
Mars and Venus, is thus mischievously assimilated to an epic ideal:
albeit, that of the wily Odysseus sooner than the brave Achilles or the
pious Aeneas.
The identification of Garcilaso with Periandro instead of the
Spaniard Antonio underscores the apparent absence in the novel’s south
of another key virtue: courtesy. We saw it was voiced by Rosanio
(alongside charity) soon after the northern pilgrims first cross into
Spain. Garcilaso, who died fighting under Charles V’s banners, was
associated with the courtly ideal, among other reasons, because he
encouraged 
the 
celebrated 
translation 
(1534) 
of 
Baldassare
Castiglione’s Il Cortegiano (The Book of the Courtier) by his friend the
Catalan poet Juan Boscán. Castiglione was the papal nuncio at the
imperial court (Toledo) while he revised his courtesy manual for
publication. Many times he (through Federico, Gaspare, Calmeta,
Bernardo, and Magnifico) holds up the Spanish as examples for their
wit, dress, calm dignity, casual mastery of chess, courage, and
prudence.
By contrast, in Persiles the passing reference to Madrid makes the
point about courtesy particularly bluntly. The so-called old pilgrim
woman (‘antigua peregrina’) has this to say about the royal court, a
place where noble youths devote themselves to the game of love:
‘andaban en la corte ciertos pequeños que tenían fama de ser hijos de
grandes que, aunque pájaros noveles, se abatían al señuelo de
cualquiera mujer hermosa, de cualquiera calidad que fuese: que el
amor antojadizo no busca calidades, sino hermosura’126 [‘at court were
certain young men reputed to be the sons of grandees, and though mere
fledglings they are drawn to the decoy of any beautiful woman, of
whatever quality, for wilful love does not seek qualities, only beauty’].
The court is reduced to a joke about ‘pequeños’ (young or little men)
with the reputation of ‘grandes’ [great or older men, with a quibble on
grandees] when they are merely titled. It is a particularly interesting
joke since the behaviour that appears to prevail at court recalls the
adoration of beauty we saw on the barbarians’ isle—only in a comedic
key. It is in effect a court sans courtesy. The young noblemen are
portrayed as fledgling birds of prey, chasing after anything beautiful
like so many comic Bradamiros, Policarpos, and Nemurs in the making
(and on the make): a jocular, frivolous reincarnation of the barbarian
isle, distinguished by its idolatry of appearances with its parody of
courtly love tropes. No wonder the northern pilgrims will skip this
destination. They have been there before.
The paradoxical force of that brief but symbolically charged
encounter in Toledo stands out if we remember the neogothicism of the
Magnus brothers. It is as if these apparently alien and primitive
northern heroes, like the Swedish brothers in Rome, had returned to
reclaim their legacy. As a result, we meet with a kind of prophecy of
their resurrection in Periandro’s speech (‘para volver a resucitar su
muerta gloria’ [‘to revive their dead glory’]). For all of their faults and
cunning, Persiles’s heroes do effectively revive that dead glory of the
‘Goths’ over the course of the novel. Periandro, the Gothic (as the
Magnus brothers might insist) prince of Tile, gazes into the mirror of
the relics and ceremonies of the Visigoths. In so doing, he opens a
novelistic chasm between the dead glories of Toledo and the living
glory of the protagonists.
We need not doubt the sincerity of Periandro’s praise of Toledo to
recognize that, in the context of the whole novel, it can begin to sound
like a mock encomium. The practice of charity and courtesy (like the
appreciation of Garcilaso and of reading), apparently dead in Toledo
and Madrid, have been reborn in our heroes from the northern barbaric
isle and Tile.127 It is one of the more powerful ironies in Persiles that
the alibi for this journey should be their need to receive lessons in the
faith.
One measure of Cervantes’s relation to Persiles’s seriocomic
challenges is provided by the self-portrait of the renowned prologue. In
that opening salvo Cervantes imagines his own sardonic approach to
Madrid and Toledo.128 Persiles’s playful commitment to a refined
ironization of foundational myths, which spares nothing, is announced
there already in order to target the author himself. Cervantes spins an
amusing, poignant yarn days before his death. We learn of his
encounter with a bumbling student admirer, just as he is about to enter
Madrid by the bridge of Toledo. As if to ensure we do not miss the
point, the student asks whether Cervantes and his two friends are
seeking preferment since the Archbishop of Toledo (Cervantes’s patron
don Bernardo de Sandoval) and the king were both at court (Madrid).
Cervantes’s valedictory persona is in part Christological (like Christ’s
entry into Jerusalem days before the Crucifixion), as Elias Rivers
observed.129 It is also evocative of Silenus, tutor of the god of laughter
whom Don Quixote remembers riding ‘muy a su placer caballero’ [‘at
his very chivalric pleasure’] into the city of 100 gates.130
Becoming one with his quixotic and Nordic heroes, Cervantes turns
the occasion into a celebration of the comic possibilities of literature,
life, and even his own imminent death. The student aficionado falls all
over himself in praise of Cervantes, whom he calls ‘el regocijo de las
musas’ [‘the delight of the muses’].131 Cervantes dismisses the praise as
nonsense (a ‘baratija’ or cheap bauble), insisting he is not the delight of
the muses but simply Cervantes. Having burst the bubble of the
student’s inflated praise, Cervantes presents us with an image of his
ideal relation with this, perhaps with every, reader: he asks him to
climb back on his ass and to give him—in place of hyperbole—
conversation. We have no trouble recognizing the authorial persona of
Don Quixote in such moments. If Don Quixote’s burlesque ironies take
aim mainly at the hero’s personal myths and Persiles’s fine-spun ones at
more than one collective myth, the two come together in the moment
when Cervantes mocks his own fame. In the wake of Lucian (and
Epicurus), Erasmus, Guevara (and Silenus), Cervantes bids farewell to
his merry friends [‘adiós, regocijados amigos’] by incarnating his own
novelistic proposal to readers: an entertainment that invites them to
look at themselves through others’ eyes; to recognize how marvellous,
surprising, and strange the world they think they know is; and to laugh
at their own barbarities.
Works Cited
Alcalá Galán, Mercedes. Escritura desatada: poéticas de la representación en
Cervantes (Alcalá de Henares: CEC, 2009).
Alcalá Galán, Mercedes, Antonio Cortijo Ocaña, and Francisco Layna (eds). ‘Si
ya por atrevido no sale con las manos en la cabeza’: el legado poético del
“Persiles” cuatrocientos años después. eHumanista/Cervantes 5, Special Issue
(2016 [2017]).
Allen, Kenneth P. ‘Aspects of Time in Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda’.
Revista Hispánica Moderna 36, no. 3 (1970–1): pp. 77–107.
Andrès, Christian (ed.). Autour de ‘Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda: Historia
septentrional’ de Miguel de Cervantes. Etudes sur un roman expérimental du Siècle
d’Or (Paris: Indigo, 2003).
Armstrong-Roche, Michael. Cervantes’s Epic Novel: Empire, Religion, and the
Dream Life of Heroes in ‘Persiles’ (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2009).
Armstrong-Roche, Michael. ‘Europa como bárbaro Nuevo Mundo en la novela
épica de Cervantes’. In Actas del V Congreso Internacional de la Asociación de
Cervantistas, vol. 2, edited by Alicia Villar Lecumberri (Palma de Mallorca:
Asociación de Cervantistas, 2004), pp. 1123–38.
Armstrong-Roche, Michael. ‘La mirada lucianesca en el Persiles’. Revista de
Occidente 439 (2017): pp. 77–98.
Atkinson, William C. ‘The Enigma of the Persiles’. Bulletin of Spanish Studies 24,
no. 96 (1947: October): pp. 242–53.
Avalle-Arce, Juan Bautista. ‘Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda, historia
setentrional’. In Suma Cervantina, edited by Juan Bautista Avalle-Arce and E.C.
Riley (London: Tamesis Books, 1973), pp. 199–212.
Baumbach, Manuel. ‘An Egyptian Priest at Delphi: Calasiris as theios anēr in
Heliodorus’ Aethiopica’. In Practitioners of the Divine: Greek Priests and Religious
Figures from Homer to Heliodorus, edited by Beate Dignas and Kai Trampedach
(Washington, Hellenic Studies Series 30, 2008). Consulted at http://
nrs.harvard.edu/
urn-3:hul.ebook:CHS_DignasB_and_TrampedachK_eds.Practitioners_of_the_Divine.2008.
Blanco, Mercedes. ‘Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda: entretenimiento y
verdad poética’. Criticón 91 (2004): pp. 5–39.
Boruchoff, David A. ‘Competir con Heliodoro: Cervantes y la crítica ante una
leyenda’. In U.S.A. Cervantes: 39 cervantistas en Estados Unidos, edited by
Georgina Dopico Black and Francisco Layna Ranz (Madrid: Ediciones
Polifemo, 2009), pp. 177–210.
Brioso Sánchez, Máximo, and Héctor Brioso Santos. ‘Sobre la problemática
relación en Heliodoro y el Persiles y Sigismunda de Cervantes: el motivo de la
comunicación lingüística’. Criticón 86 (2002): pp. 73–96.
Canavaggio, Jean. Cervantes, entre vida y creación (Alcalá de Henares: CEC,
2000.
Carilla, Emilio. ‘El humor en el Persiles’. Filología. 13 (1968–9): pp. 111–19.
Casalduero, Joaquín. Sentido y forma de ‘Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda’
(Buenos Aires: Editorial Sudamericana, 1947).
Castillo, David, and Nicholas Spadaccini. ‘El antiutopismo en Los trabajos de
Persiles y Sigismunda: Cervantes y el cervantismo actual’. Cervantes: Bulletin of
the Cervantes Society of America 20, no. 1, (2000): pp. 115–31.
Castro, Américo. El pensamiento de Cervantes (Barcelona: Crítica, 1987 [1925]).
Cavillac, Michel. ‘Guzmán de Alfarache’ y la novela moderna (Madrid: Casa de
Velázquez, 2010).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Don Quijote de la Mancha, directed by Francisco Rico
(Barcelona: Crítica, 1998).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda, edited by Carlos
Romero Muñoz (Madrid: Cátedra, 2004).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Novelas ejemplares, edited by Jorge García López
(Barcelona: Crítica, 2010).
Cervantes, Miguel de. The Trials of Persiles and Sigismunda: A Northern Story,
translated by Celia Richmond Weller and Clark A. Colahan (Indianapolis:
Hackett Publishing Company, 1989).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Viaje del Parnaso, en Obra completa III, edited by Florencio
Sevilla Arroyo and Antonio Rey Hazas (Alcalá de Henares: CEC, 1995).
Childers, William. Transnational Cervantes (Toronto: University of Toronto Press,
2006).
Colahan, Clark. ‘Auristela y Cenotia, personalidades horacianas en el Persiles’.
Anales Cervantinos 44 (2012): pp. 173–86.
Colahan, Clark. ‘Cariclea y Sigismunda: narrativas bizantinas, deidades clásicas’.
In Actas del VII Congreso Internacional de la Asociación de Cervantistas, edited
by Christoph Strosetzki (Alcalá de Henares: Asociación de Cervantistas,
2011), pp. 227–37.
Colahan, Clark, Celia Weller, and Michael McGaha (eds.). A Symposium on ‘Los
trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of
America 10, no. 1 (1990).
Cruz Casado, Antonio. ‘Periandro/Persiles: Las raíces clásicas del personaje y la
aportación de Cervantes’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of
America, 15, no. 1 (1995): pp. 60–9.
Egido, Aurora. ‘Las fronteras de la poesía en prosa’. In Fronteras de la poesía en el
Barroco (Barcelona: Crítica, 1990), pp. 85–114.
Egido, Aurora. ‘Las voces del Persiles’. In ¿Bon compaño, jura di!? El encuentro de
moros, judíos y cristianos en la obra cervantina, edited by Caroline Schmauser
and Monika Walter (Madrid: Iberoamericana, 1998), pp. 107–34.
El Saffar, Ruth S. Beyond Fiction: The Recovery of the Feminine in the Novels of
Cervantes (Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1984).
Fernández Albaladejo, Pablo. ‘Entre godos y montañeses: avatares de una
primera identidad española’. Cuadernos de Alzate: revista vasca de la cultura y
las ideas 33 (2005): pp. 19–53.
Ferrer-Chivite, Manuel. ‘Aspectos de la oralidad en el Persiles’. In Actas del IV
Congreso Internacional de la Asociación de Cervantistas, vol. 2, edited Antonio
Bernat Vistarini (Palma de Mallorca: UIB, 1981), pp. 895–906.
Foote, Peter, and Peter Fisher. ‘Introduction’ to Historia de gentibus
septentrionalibus (Romae 1555) by Olaus Magnus (London: The Hakluyt
Society, 1996), pp. XIII–LXXXIX.
Forcione, Alban. Cervantes, Aristotle, and the ‘Persiles’ (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1970).
Frenk, Margit. Don Quijote ¿muere cuerdo? y otras cuestiones cervantinas (México:
FCE, 2015).
Frye, Northrop. The Secular Scripture. In The Collected Edition of the Works of
Northrop Frye, vol. 18, edited by Joseph Adamson and Jean Wilson (Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 2006).
Fuchs, Barbara. Passing for Spain: Cervantes and the Fictions of Identity (Urbana:
University of Illinois Press, 2003).
García Berrio, Antonio and Isabel Lozano-Renieblas (eds.). Cervantes y el
‘Persiles’: final de obra y principio de gloria. Revista de Occidente Special Issue
439 (2017).
García García, Bernardo (dir.). Tiempo de paces (1606–2009): La Pax Hispánica y
la Tregua de los Doce Años (Madrid: Fundación Carlos de Amberes, 2009).
García López, Jorge. ‘Prólogo’. Novelas ejemplares by Miguel de Cervantes
(Barcelona: Crítica, 2010).
Gaylord, Mary. ‘Cervantes’s Other Fiction’. In The Cambridge Companion to
Cervantes, edited by Anthony Cascardi (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2002), pp. 100–30.
Gaylord Randel, Mary. ‘Ending and meaning in Cervantes’s Persiles y
Sigismunda’. Romanic Review 74 (1983): pp. 152–69.
Gerli, E. Michael. Refiguring Authority: Reading, Writing, and Rewriting in
Cervantes (Lexington: The University Press of Kentucky, 1995.
Gerli, E. Michael. ‘Xadraque Xarife’s Prophecy, Persiles III, 11: The Larger
Setting and the Lasting Irony’. In ‘Si ya por atrevido no sale con las manos en la
cabeza’: el legado poético del “Persiles” cuatrocientos años después, eHumanista/
Cervantes 5, Special Issue, edited by Mercedes Alcalá Galán, Antonio Cortijo
Ocaña and Francisco Layna (2016 [2017]), pp. 265–83.
Gómez Canseco, Luis. Don Bernardo de Sandoval y Rojas (Huelva: Uhu.es
Publicaciones, 2017).
González Rovira, Javier. La novela bizantina de la Edad de Oro (Madrid: Gredos,
1996).
Ihrie, Maureen. Skepticism in Cervantes (London: Tamesis Books, 1982).
López Alemany, Ignacio. ‘Ut pictura non poesis: Los trabajos de Persiles y
Sigismunda and the Construction of Memory’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the
Cervantes Society of America 28, no. 1 (2008): pp. 103–18.
López Navía, Santiago. ‘Pseudohistoricidad y pseudoautoría en el Persiles:
límites y relevancia’. In Actas del V Congreso Internacional de la Asociación de
Cervantistas, vol. 1, edited by Alicia Villar Lecumberri (Palma de Mallorca:
Asociación de Cervantistas, 2004), pp. 458– 82.
Lozano-Renieblas, Isabel. Cervantes y el mundo del ‘Persiles’ (Alcalá de Henares:
CEC, 1998).
Lozano-Renieblas, Isabel. Cervantes y los retos del ‘Persiles’ (Salamanca: SEMYR,
2014).
Lozano-Renieblas, Isabel. ‘Estudio: La última novela de Miguel de Cervantes’. In
Miguel de Cervantes, Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda, edited by Laura
Fernández (Madrid: Real Academia Española, 2017), pp. 443–502.
Lukens-Olson, Carolyn. ‘Heroics of Persuasion in Los trabajos de Persiles y
Sigismunda’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 21, no. 2
(2001): pp. 51–72.
Ly, Nadine. ‘Pour une lecture poétique du Persiles’. Bulletin Hispanique 107, no. 1
(2005): pp. 71–108.
Maestro, Jesús G. (ed.). Anuario de Estudios Cervantinos, XI. El pensamiento
literario del último Cervantes: del ‘Parnaso’ al ‘Persiles’ (Vigo: Academia del
Hispanismo, 2015).
Mancing, Howard. The Cervantes Encyclopedia, volume II (Westport: Greenwood
Press, 2004), pp. 716–37.
Márquez Villanueva, Francisco. ‘Trasfondos de “La profecía del Tajo”: goticismo
y profetismo’. In Fray Luis de León: Historia, humanismo y letras, edited by
Víctor García de la Concha and Javier San José Lera (Salamanca: Ediciones
Universidad, 1996), pp. 423–40.
Molho, Maurice. ‘Préface’. Les travaux de Persille et Sigismonde: histoire
septentrionale by Miguel de Cervantes (Paris: Librairie José Corti, 1994), pp.
7–69.
Moner, Michel. ‘Autour de la bouche: avatars et vicissitudes de l’oralité dans Les
travaux de Persiles et Sigismonde’. Les Langues Néo-Latines 327 (2003): pp. 93–
110.
Montero Reguera, José. ‘Adiós, poesía, adiós’. Revista de Occidente 439 (2017):
pp. 49–59.
Muñoz Sánchez, Juan Ramón. ‘El mejor de los libros de entretenimiento’:
Reflexiones sobre Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda (Alcalá de Henares:
Universidad de Alcalá, 2018).
Nerlich, Michael. El ‘Persiles’ descodificado, o la ‘Divina Comedia’ de Cervantes,
translated by Jesús Munárriz (Madrid: Libros Hiperión, 2005).
Pavel, Thomas G. The Lives of the Novel: A History (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 2013).
Pelorson, Jean-Marc. ‘Le Persiles et Les Ethiopiques: esquisse d’une comparaison
dynamique’. In Autour de ‘Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda: Historia
septentrional’ de Miguel de Cervantes. Etudes sur un roman expérimental du Siècle
d’Or, edited by Christian Andrès (Paris: Indigo, 2003), pp. 15–32.
Redondo, Augustin. ‘Don Quijote y el libro’. Cervantes en el Siglo XXI: Lectores y
revisiones (1616–2016). Revista de Occidente 427 (2016): pp. 68–88.
Rico, Francisco and Joaquín Forradellas. ‘Chapter I’. In Volumen complementario,
Don Quijote de la Mancha by Miguel de Cervantes (Barcelona: Crítica, 1998),
pp. 16–18.
Rivers, Elías. ‘Cervantes’ art of the prologue’. In Estudios literarios de hispanistas
norteamericanos dedicados a Helmut Hatzfeld con motivo de su 80 aniversario,
edited by Joseph M. Sola-Solé, Alessandro Crisafulli, and Bruno Damiani
(Barcelona: Hispam, 1974), pp. 167–71.
Romm, James. The Edges of the Earth in Ancient Thought: Geography, Exploration,
and Fiction (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992).
Ruiz Pérez, Pedro. La distinción cervantina: poética e historia (Alcalá de Henares:
CEC, 2006).
Sacchetti, Maria Alberta. Cervantes’s ‘Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda’: A
Study of Genre (London: Támesis, 2001).
Sánchez, Jean-Pierre (ed.). Lectures d’une oeuvre: ‘Los trabajos de Persiles y
Sigismunda’ de Cervantes (Nantes: Editions du temps, 2003).
Schevill, Rudolph. ‘Studies in Cervantes. Persiles y Sigismunda. II. The Question
of Heliodorus’. Modern Philology 4 (1906–1907b): pp. 677–704.
Velázquez, Sonia. ‘Of poets and barbarians: challenging linguistic hierarchies in
Cervantes’s Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda’. Revista Hispánica Moderna
67, no. 2 (2014): pp. 205–21.
Vilanova, Antonio. ‘El peregrino andante en el Persiles de Cervantes’. Boletín de
la Real Academia de Buenas Letras (Barcelona) 22 (1949): pp. 97–159.
Villar Lecumberi, Alicia (ed.). Actas del V Congreso Internacional de la Asociación
de Cervantistas, vol. 1 (Palma de Mallorca: Asociación de Cervantistas, 2004).
Williamsen, Amy. Co(s)mic chaos: exploring ‘Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda’
(Newark: Juan de la Cuesta, 1994).
Wilson, Diana de Armas. Allegories of Love: Cervantes’s ‘Persiles and Sigismunda.’
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1991).
Zimic, Stanislav. Cuentos y episodios del ‘Persiles’: De la isla bárbara a una
apoteosis del amor humano (Vilagarcía de Arousa: Mirabel, 2005).
Zimic, Stanislav. ‘El Persiles como crítica de la novela bizantina’. Acta
neophilologica 3 (1970): pp. 49–64.
1 All translations of Persiles are mine. I have consulted the Weller and
Colahan translation throughout for guidance.
2 For the international scope and proliferation of approaches, see the
collections edited by Colahan, Weller and McGaha, Sánchez, Andrès, Villar
Lecumberri, Maestro, Alcalá Galán, Cortijo Ocaña, and Layna.
3 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, p. 81.
4 Besides the Aethiopica, there was marked interest in Achilles Tatius’s
Leucippe and Clitophon. For the Greek novel’s early Spanish reception
(translations, adaptations, imitations), see González Rovira, pp. 20–63, 249–52,
329–35.
5 On some of the meanings attached to Heliodorus, see Boruchoff.
6 For Heliodorus’s sixteenth-century reception as a paradigm for long prose
fictions, see Schevill and Forcione.
7 For what Cervantes could have learned from El Pinciano, see especially
Atkinson and Forcione.
8 For the overtly political turn of such novels in the 1620s, see González
Rovira, pp. 249–52 and 311–27.
9 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 442–3.
10 For a blow-by-blow description of the novel’s plot, see Mancing.
11 For a detailed overview of Persiles’s internal chronology, see Allen.
12 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 702.
13 On the characters’ names, see Armstrong-Roche, Cervantes’s Epic Novel, pp.
88–90 and 102–3; and both articles by Colahan. To avoid confusion, I refer to
the heroes by their titular names in the general discussion and by their aliases
as they crop up in the detailed account of the narrative.
14 Vilanova offers the fullest early discussion of these tropes. Although he
classifies Persiles’s protagonists as Counter-Reformation heroes, his criterion is
not primarily religious but literary: the vogue for fictions about pilgrims in the
broad period sense (which could include lovers, travellers for pleasure, and
even conquerors) following the Council of Trent (1545–63).
15 On Persiles’s political themes, see Armstrong-Roche, Cervantes’s Epic Novel,
pp. 53–74, 80–97, 124–5, 160–6, and especially 205–303.
16 I borrow these characterizations of Don Quixote from Redondo because
they apply as well to Persiles.
17 After World War II scholars began to pit a sceptical or Erasmist Don
Quixote against a more conformist and even militantly Counter-Reformation
Persiles. Influenced by the idea of a spirit of the age impervious to irony and
Don Quixote’s burlesque tone, this turn went hand-in-hand with a tendency to
classify Don Quixote as a novel and Persiles as a romance. The pilgrimage to
Rome was read as a parable of the history of humanity (Casalduero), as an
allegory of the pilgrimage of life (Vilanova), as a narrative translation of the
Christianized Chain of Being linking heaven and hell with its ladder of moral
perfectibility (Avalle-Arce), and as a romance of the Christian cycle of sin, fall,
and redemption (Forcione, 1972). The ironizing readings outlined in note 24
have since mapped how Persiles tests these idealizing tropes against the actions
and characterizations actually met with on the road to Rome.
18 Castro, pp. 213–19; for the Quixote, Ruiz Pérez, pp. 209–32; for Persiles,
Armstrong-Roche, Cervantes’s Epic Novel, pp. 167–204, and Cervantes, Los
trabajos de…, pp. 161–2, 199, 213–14, 310, 408–9, 518–19, 535, 601–4, 615,
630–1, 701–3.
19 Cervantes described himself so in the 1614 Viaje del Parnaso: ‘“Yo,
socarrón; yo, poetón ya viejo”’ [‘“I, the sardonic one; I, the big old poet”’]
(Cervantes, Viaje del Parnaso, p. 1344, v. 409).
20 For full discussions of narrative voice in the Quixote, see Frenk, pp. 19–54;
for Persiles, see Forcione, Williamsen, López Navía.
21 On Persiles and Guzmán, see Cavillac, pp. 233–51.
22 The sceptical turn in Cervantes’s mature work might owe something to the
late sixteenth-century revival of Menippean satire, Stoic philosophy, and
classical scepticism. On sceptical currents in Renaissance Spain, Don Quijote,
and Persiles, see Ihrie.
23 García López, pp. 32–6.
24 Persiles’s ironies have only gradually been recognized by contrast to Don
Quijote’s: see Forcione, pp. 169–301 (a send-up of neo-Aristotelian precept);
Zimic (parody); Gaylord (the quest for an ideal order compromised); Williamsen
(carnivalesque inversion and meta-fiction); Molho (rationalism); Lozano-
Renieblas, Cervantes y el mundo…and Cervantes y los retos…(pervasive doubts);
Castillo and Spadaccini (anti-Utopianism); Pelorson (satire); Fuchs (anti-
essential identities); Blanco, 2004 (epic aspiration, novelistic execution);
Armstrong-Roche, ‘Europa como bárbaro…’ and Cervantes’s Epic Novel
(paradox); Nerlich (political and religious allegory critical of official pieties);
and Childers (picaresque realism).
25 Castro’s 1925 reading of all of Cervantes’s work informed by its shared
intellectual history remains fundamental. For other approaches to the
continuities among Cervantes’s late works, see the special issue edited by García
Berrio and Lozano-Renieblas.
26 Cervantes’s cross-fertilization of the Greek novel with epic ironizes both
(each providing what the other lacks) without degenerating into burlesque
deflation. For examples of this complex generic dialogue, see Armstrong-Roche,
Cervantes’s Epic Novel, pp. 8–18, 31–2, 36–8, 68–74, 88–90, 112–14, 125–6,
130–1, 140–5, 167–209, 248, 264–72.
27 I mean a trickster figure along the lines of a Basilio (Don Quixote) or an
Isabela Castrucha (Persiles) rather than of the picaresque rogue Ginés de
Pasamonte or (more ambiguously still) the false captives of Persiles: Persiles
wields his cunning provisionally against the social impediment to a mutually
consenting love rather than as a permanent commitment to fraud. Scholars
unsympathetic to Persiles and Sigismunda’s dissembling often downplay the real
dangers to them on their trek.
28 Cruz Casado, pp. 63–5.
29 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 394.
30 On the paradoxographic character of Persiles, see Armstrong-Roche,
Cervantes’s Epic Novel, pp. 18–25.
31 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 701–4. El Saffar broke new ground for
Persiles on feminist, psychoanalytical, and alchemical grounds: she argued that,
unlike Don Quijote, Persiles overcomes René Girard’s pattern of violent mimetic
desire and reconciles opposites (dream and reality, fiction and truth) through
the hero’s ‘recovery of the feminine’. Wilson attributes Persiles’s favourable view
of women and human love to the Renaissance embrace of Neoplatonic
androgyny (an idealized image of human perfection that reconciles opposites),
notably through the Hispano-Jewish Leone Ebreo’s influential dialogues on
love.
32 Moreover, Persiles knows it, comparing himself to an all-encompassing
rhetorical figure: ‘[S]oy hecho como esto que se llama lugar, que es donde todas
las cosas caben’ [‘I take after what we call a (common) place, which is where all
things fit’]. Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 363. The protagonist’s physical and
moral elusiveness (androgyny in some moments, brawny athletic prowess in
others, dissembling throughout) has divided scholars, who cannot agree
whether he is a hero or a parody of one.
33 On Sigismunda’s crucial political, religious, and amorous protagonism, see
Armstrong-Roche, Cervantes’s Epic Novel, pp. 103–10, 205–10, 245–9, 275–80.
For a less favourable view of her complexity, see Sacchetti.
34 Cervantes might be playfully evoking divine intervention in the destiny of
epic heroes, notably in Aeneas’s case by his mother Venus. The fact is recalled
when the northern protagonists arrive in Rome (Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p.
647).
35 The narrator rates Persiles higher than Arnaldo (his most serious rival) as
a suitor (Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 144, 182–3, 249–51, 300, 423, 429–
30). With respect to Persiles’s more frequently suspect narrative gifts, the
narrator likes to think of himself as a good historian and dutifully records the
reproaches (for irrelevance or implausibility) as well as the praise (for sheer
pleasure) but tends to reconcile them in the name of everyone’s (including the
doubters’) pleasure (Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 351–2, 356, 363, 371–2,
378, 383, 415, 419–20).
36 Lukens-Olson presents Persiles as a hero of persuasion. I agree but would
invert the terms: to the extent he is persuasive it is because he knows how to
listen to and learn, even to invent self-interestedly, from other characters.
37 For key examples of this difference between Periandro and Arnaldo, see
Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 228–9, 237, 286, 288–90, 299–301, 423, 429–
30, 576–7, 603, 627–30, 637–43, 687, 690–7, 702, and 712.
38 See Rico and Forradellas.
39 See García García. The Pax Hispanica’s ideological lodestar would be
Tacitism: a tempered Machiavellian Realpolitik, neo-Stoic exemplarity, and
epigrammatic style widely attributed in this period to the Roman historian
Tacitus. In Cervantes’s circle, the humanist Pedro de Valencia stands out as the
voice of this new political turn in Spain. See Gómez Canseco, pp. 146–53.
40 See Montero.
41 See Ferrer-Chivite.
42 ‘Tan mezclados están, que no hay quien pueda / discernir cuál es malo o
cuál es bueno, / cuál es garcilasista o timoneda’ [‘They are so confused, no one
could possibly make out which is bad and which good, which Garcilasista and
which Timoneda’]. Cervantes, Viaje del Parnaso, pp. 1328–9, vv. 292–4.
43 Cervantes, Viaje del Parnaso, pp. 1243–4, vv. 49–72; p. 1327, vv. 256–61;
p. 1330, vv. 322–30.
44 The wit, elevation, and expressive sonority of Persiles’s prose are as finely
worked at times as the mannerist verse of Góngora. See Ly.
45 Cervantes, Viaje del Parnaso, p. 1327, vv. 241–3.
46 For another reading of Persiles’s opening, see Blanco, pp. 30–6.
47 Baumbach, ‘An Egyptian Priest at Delphi…’, section 1.
48 The echo of Heliodorus’s incipit is unmistakeable at the beginning of
Persiles’s tale and, to a lesser extent, when he narrates the attack of the
marauders on the fishers’ isle (Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 340–3 and 357–
60).
49 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 127–8.
50 On the centrality of voice(s) in Persiles, see Egido, ‘Las voces…’.
51 Cervantes, Viaje del Parnaso, p. 1330, v. 323. For another reading of
Persiles’s opening sentence in relation to Góngora, see Velázquez, pp. 216–19.
52 For the dynamic interplay between prose and verse in Spanish Golden Age
literary genres, see Egido, ‘Las fronteras…’.
53 Forcione, pp. 49–87.
54 Velázquez, pp. 207–14.
55 On orality, see Moner; on popular genres, Lozano Renieblas, Cervantes y los
retos…; and on humour, Williamsen and Carilla.
56 For Valdivieso’s ties to these apparently sworn enemies, see Gómez
Canseco, pp. 75–90, 138–9.
57 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 112.
58 For a more detailed account of the neolucianic aspects of Persiles,
including key coincidences with twentieth-century magical realism, see
Armstrong-Roche, ‘La mirada lucianesca…’.
59 Pelorson suggests that the point of view of Nordic outsiders enables an
‘inversion satirique’ [‘satirical inversion’] scarcely possible with Heliodorus’s
geographic choices (p. 27). He explains it as an anticipation of Enlightenment
relativism. By pointing to the Lucianesque faux naïf prototype, exemplified by
his dialogue Anacharsis (widely imitated in sixteenth-century Spain), I situate
Cervantes’s use of the inverted perspective device in a well-documented
historical tradition.
60 For a detailed explanation of this contrast with Heliodorus and Lope, see
Armstrong-Roche, ‘La mirada lucianesca…’.
61 When more than one textual citation of Persiles figures in the same
paragraph, I gather all references in the first footnote. Cervantes, Los trabajos
de…, pp. 484, 488, 566, 582, 586, 593, 630.
62 Lozano-Renieblas, Cervantes y el mundo…, pp. 190–2.
63 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 258 (one of Taurisa’s Christian suitors
runs a sword through his rival’s heart), 270–1 (Periandro’s arrow splits a dove’s
heart during Policarpo’s ceremonial games), 352 (Antonio threatens to kill
Cenotia with a dagger), 355 (Cenotia’s warnings about Auristela are said to
pierce Policarpo’s heart like sharp nails), 456 (Feliciana’s father draws a sword
when he discovers she has borne a child out of wedlock), 501 (Periandro evokes
the blade that Ortel would use to slit his wife and her lover’s throat in a public
execution in Madrid), 517–18 (the peace-making count is fatally wounded by a
bullet through his back and chest in Antonio’s hometown), 575 (Antonio the
barbarian rescues Félix by killing her French abductor Rubertino with an arrow
through his chest), 592 (Ruperta savours taking revenge on her husband’s
murderer by sinking a dagger in his son Croriano’s chest), 608 (Antonio
imagines the only cure for Bartolomé’s dangerous love for Luisa is to shoot an
arrow through his chest), 638 (Arnaldo nearly kills Nemurs with a sword thrust
through his chest in Rome), 709 (in Rome Pirro runs a sword from Periandro’s
right shoulder through his left).
64 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 229, 293, 429, 622, 639, 690, 713.
65 On polyglossia in the Aethiopica and Persiles, see Brioso Sánchez and Brioso
Santos.
66 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 582.
67 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 436.
68 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 140, 144, 158, 184, 189, 192, 202, 205–6,
239, 282, 351, 363, 367, 398, 436.
69 The competing tendencies of Persiles scholarship can be traced in three
representative overviews: idealizing and didactic, in Avalle-Arce’s; historicizing,
in Gaylord’s, ‘Cervantes other…’, pp. 17–25; and ludic, in Lozano-Renieblas,
‘Estudio’.
70 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 336.
71 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 152, 175, 336.
72 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 352, 354.
73 For a detailed account of the secondary stories in Persiles, see Múnoz
Sánchez, pp. 22–35, 218–43. This fascinating aspect of the novel led Jean
Babelon to call it an itinerant Decameron (Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 38).
74 See Armstrong-Roche, Cervantes’s Epic Novel, pp. 129–66 (for Antonio and
Ricla), pp. 77–83 (for Rutilio), pp. 210–24 (for Manuel and Leonora) and pp.
224–30 (for Renato and Eusebia, especially the political dimension of the duel).
75 For a more detailed analysis of Feliciana’s tale, see Armstrong-Roche, ‘La
mirada lucianesca…’.
76 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 150.
77 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 156 and 449, 156 and 447–8, 159 and
450, 156 and 476, 156 and 467 (and 471), 158 and 474.
78 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 156 and 474 (and 476).
79 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 432.
80 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 158, 184, 195–206, 436–7.
81 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 456.
82 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 448.
83 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 448, 450, 451 and 463.
84 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 402, 461.
85 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 513.
86 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 260.
87 On typology (ironized) as a possible inspiration for Persiles’s narrative
structure, see Armstrong-Roche, Cervantes’s Epic Novel, pp. 280–90.
88 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 431–3, 457, 459.
89 Forcione, p. 38 n. 55.
90 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 567, 585, 663, 669. Fuchs reads this more
broadly (with other examples of dissembling) as the expression of a fluid
conception of identity, informed by converso experience, that disavows the
primacy of origin she associates with purity of blood and Counter-Reformation
strictures. Fuchs, pp. 91–106, especially pp. 104–5.
91 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 698–9. My translation of the Latin
original is in italics.
92 Romm, p. 158.
93 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 702–3.
94 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 664–5.
95 See p. 265 for more evidence of the way Cervantes heightens the epic
presence in his Greek novel.
96 Frye, pp. 65–75, reminds us that both guile (froda) and force (forza) are
key attributes of the epic hero.
97 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 706.
98 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 651.
99 For the novel’s inversion of the translatio imperii and the pattern of New
World conquest, see Armstrong-Roche, Cervantes’s Epic Novel, pp. 65–74.
100 See Lozano-Renieblas, Cervantes y el mundo del ‘Persiles’, pp. 24–31.
101 See Foote and Fisher, pp. xxix–xxxviii and lx–lxiv.
102 Foote and Fisher, pp. lx–lxi.
103 Since both Iceland and Norway were under Danish rule in this period,
Persiles’s triumph over the Danish prince Arnaldo makes him an upstart twice-
over. While the Magnus brothers celebrated a pan-Gothic revival, they were
also keen to note their native Sweden’s recent liberation from what they
regarded as Danish tyranny.
104 For the novel’s subtle exploration of the central theological issue of
repentance in Auristela’s and Hipólita’s crises in Rome, see Cervantes, Los
trabajos de…, pp. 657, 667, 676, 693–6, 710.
105 See Fernández Albaladejo and Márquez Villanueva.
106 See Gerli, ‘Xadraque Xarife’s Profecy’.
107 Márquez Villanueva, p. 426.
108 See Gerli, ‘Rewriting Myth…’.
109 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 509–10.
110 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 505.
111 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 432.
112 For a Pauline reading of this tendency, understood in relation to Catholic
reform currents in sixteenth-century Spain, see Armstrong-Roche, Cervantes’s
Epic Novel, pp. 111–66; and for its political aspect, contrasted with the morisco
expulsion and the purity of blood statutes, pp. 250–64 and 293–303.
113 ‘[El] jamás alabado como se debe poeta’ [‘The never sufficiently praised
poet’]. Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 504.
114 See Canavaggio.
115 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 153, 385, 504.
116 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 503–4.
117 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 504.
118 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 505.
119 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 385.
120 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 386.
121 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 386.
122 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 637–44. On Auristela’s portraits, see
Gaylord, ‘Ending and Meaning…’, Alcalá Galán, pp. 97–106 and López
Alemany.
123 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 386 (for Periandro’s justifications) and
384 (for Sensualidad’s warning).
124 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 437–9.
125 On the heroic portrayal of conjugal love, the sixteenth-century revaluation
of matrimony, and this episode as a lyrically inspired ironization of epic, see
Armstrong-Roche, Cervantes’s Epic Novel, pp. 97–110, 141–8, 167–204, and
230–49.
126 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 510.
127 Michael Nerlich explains Persiles’s neogothicism by reference to the
Visigothic era and Protestantism rather than to well-documented cross-currents
within sixteenth-century Spanish Catholicism. I summarize the contrasts in our
views in Armstrong-Roche, Cervantes’s Epic Novel, pp. 356–8 n. 7.
128 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, pp. 118–23.
129 Rivers, p. 171.
130 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I, p. 166.
131 Cervantes, Los trabajos de…, p. 121.
Chapter 13
Cervantes and Madness
Rachel N. Bauer
Rhodes College
Scholars have studied madness in Cervantine literature from many
angles over the past four hundred years. What follows here is a
compendium of the topic to serve as a guide to future Cervantistas by
synthesizing various sociohistorical approaches to understanding
madness 
in 
sixteenth-century 
Spanish 
society, 
how 
Cervantes
represented the many faces of madness within his works, and how this
behaviour has been interpreted by critics from different fields and
viewpoints.
Cervantes wrote a considerable amount throughout his lifetime. He
experimented with different writing styles and did not recycle
personality traits amongst his characters, including those considered
mad: no two characters exhibit the same symptoms of insanity. In
addition, unlike the stereotype of the madman that often figured in
early-modern theatre, there is not one Cervantine character who is
consistently mad throughout the entire literary work in which he or
she1 appears. These characters become mad, fluctuate in degrees of
mental imbalance, may temporarily express manic rage, and usually
regain sanity at some point in the text. Especially within his prose
works, Cervantes allows his characters the freedom to evolve beyond
their character types, and this includes for some of them transitioning
through different degrees of insanity.2 The embodiment of madness
found in Cervantes’s works is different from the stagnant stereotype of
the madman found in theatre at that time. Examining the treatment of
those considered mentally imbalanced by society along with medical
texts and literature discussing insanity that were published during the
sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries, and which might have been
read by Cervantes, will highlight possible influences impacting how he
understood madness and was able to fashion his irrational characters so
completely that even now doctors feel compelled to diagnose them as if
they were real people.3
Hospitals and Medical Texts
By Cervantes’s time hospitals had been created in the centres of
Valencia, Sevilla, Zaragoza, and Toledo to house and help those with
mental disorders. The hospitals were created with the aid of the
Catholic Church in the hopes of helping those in need.4 According to
Foucault, these hospitals were the first of their kind in Europe and he
attributes this to the influence of Oriental and Arabic thought. The
Brothers of Mercy had brought this teaching back to Spain and were
familiar with the Arab world as they specialized in buying back
captives.5 Non-violent patients in the hospitals were encouraged to
work or beg out in the community. There were often plays and other
social activities, such as parades, put on so that the citizens could enjoy
these individuals’ antics as spectacle and so that those in the
community who worried about fulfilling their Christian duties could do
so through charity.6 As Tropé points out, those who were of unsound
mind were considered to be pobres de Dios (God’s poor)7 and therefore
deserving of all rules of Christian charity.8 The contradiction of viewing
the mentally unsound as entertainment, but at the same time
empathizing with them and carrying out charitable deeds to help them,
is represented in Inquisitional records that sought to determine whether
a person was in their right mind and therefore punishable for
blasphemy, heresy, or for undermining Catholic authority, or whether
the individual was mentally imbalanced and therefore unpunishable by
the Inquisition.9
This irony of helping a madman while at the same time enjoying his
unconventional behaviour surfaces in Cervantine literature, especially
in Don Quixote and the exemplary novel El licendiado Vidriera [The
Glass Licentiate]. In just about every social encounter along his
journey, Don Quixote’s antics are relished by other characters. The
barber Maese Nicolás and the priest, as well as Sansón Carrasco, go to
great lengths to have fun at Don Quixote’s expense and at the same
time work to return him home. In El licendiado Vidriera, after Tomás
Rodaja goes mad, he has a continual entourage that both enjoys his
observations and requires his counsel. These two protagonists are
madmen who embody the social dynamic of the spectacle-charity case
that still existed in Spain during Cervantes’s lifetime but who have
escaped the seventeenth century push to marginalize those individuals
considered undesirable or unable to work, as described by Foucault.10
Neither Don Quixote nor the Glass Licentiate is marginalized, but
rather they interact and participate within their culture. This is in
contrast, for example, with the mad graduate of cannon law whose
experience in La casa de locos in Sevilla is recounted by the barber at
the beginning of the second part of Don Quixote. This minor character,
whose anecdotes are retold with relish, is not released from the hospital
and is treated similarly to how the apocryphal Don Quixote is treated,
which is discussed in further detail later on in this chapter.
Around the same time that the hospitals were being created, there
was also renewed interest in understanding the causes of insanity from
a medical perspective. Sixteenth-century Spain was an epicentre for
publications in the medical field11 and Cervantes might have had access
to any number of them, either through his father, who was a barber-
surgeon, or because of these publications’ wide circulation and
numerous reprints.12 There were many medical treatises published
during this time that examined mental health,13 but the one that has
been most analysed in connection with Cervantes’s works is Juan
Huarte de San Juan’s Examen de ingenios para las ciencias.14 Literary
criticism from the first half of the twentieth century favoured a direct
influence of Huarte on Cervantes,15 where Cervantes fashioned his hero
according to Huarte’s coordinates for an individual of exceptional wit.
Soufas has suggested that Cervantes, by favouring the doctrine of free
will, was in fact parodying the biological determinism promoted by
Huarte.16 More recent research concerning potentially influential texts
has expanded the field to include other medical publications of the
time that dealt with mental illness.17 Much has been written about the
influence of Huarte in Cervantes, both in literary criticism and in the
medical field, but less has been written about other potentially
influential medical texts of the time period. In the future, a much larger
study should be attempted, bridging what has been written in both the
literary and medical fields on this subject and including a review of the
confluence of medical texts examining madness in sixteenth-century
Spain and where they surface in Cervantine literature. Due to space
limitations here, I will only highlight the more prominent examples.
First published in 1575, Huarte’s treatise utilized theories on the
four humours espoused by previous physicians such as Hippocrates,
Galen, and Avicenna. Classical thought focused on the balance of the
four humours (blood, choler, melancholy, and phlegm) within the body
and how an excess or deficit of any one of these impacted the body.
With regard to madness, if a body was too cold and dry, black bile was
overproduced, and this caused melancholy. A body that was too hot
and dry produced too much yellow bile, giving way to a choleric
temperament and possible lunacy. Dryness, if excessive, was the key
factor that led to both heightened intellect and to insanity. Where a
body was generally too dry and cold, then the person suffered from
extreme sadness and despair. If the body was consistently overly dry
and hot, the person could experience bouts of violent insanity. Huarte
also followed the observations on diet of al-Razi, Haly Abbas, and
Hunayn,18 the Persian physicians who systemized this medical thought
by focusing on the causes that impacted the humours, known as the six
non-naturals.19 These doctrines had been continued in Juan de Aviñon’s
Sevillana medicina (1545), in Andrés Laguna’s 1554 translation of
Dioscorides’s Materia medica, and in Pedro de Mercado’s Diálogos de
philosophía natural y moral (1558), to which Cervantes may have had
access. However, Huarte is the first person to equate an individual’s
personality and level of aptitude to humoral (im)balance, by
incorporating components of all of these theories to link the impact of
internal and external influences on the body to a person’s temperament,
mental capacity, and actions as well as whether the individual was
healthy or not.20 Following traditional medical theories, Huarte
believed it possible that by assessing an individual’s character, the
doctor could then determine a prevalence of choleric, melancholic,
sanguine, or phlegmatic humour as well as an excess or deficit of heat,
cold, dryness, or moisture. More importantly, Huarte put forth an early
version of biological determinism by contemplating how human
behaviour is determined by one’s biological attributes.21 Of particular
significance, he discusses at length the formation of one’s ingenio22 and
how, depending on the combination of physical factors as well as the
ratio of the three mental faculties (memory, intellect, and imagination),
an ingenioso is formed. Echoing the notion of a melancholy genius as
put forth by Aristotle in Problemata XXX, Huarte believed an ingenioso
to be someone of great talent and very beneficial to society, but he also
cited Plato’s observation that no great mind has ever existed without a
touch of madness.23 The ingenioso, imbued with a sharp and delicate
ingenio, can be prone to extremes such as overreacting, mental illness,
and melancholy, due to excesses or deficits in humoral balance.
Influence of this biological determinism can be seen throughout
Cervantine literature, but especially in Don Quixote.
Much has been speculated about Cervantes’s choice of the word
ingenioso for his magnus opus El ingenioso hidalgo don Quixote de la
Mancha. Rather than choose loco [mad], tonto [foolish], or gracioso
[funny], the only adjective he used to describe his protagonist in the
title of both the first and second part is ambiguously multi-layered. If
the reader were someone familiar with Huarte’s doctrine, the term
would have gone beyond the general usage of the day24 and indicated
an expectation of a character of great wit but with bouts of instability
or extreme behaviour. Cervantes’s particular choice of adjective here is
not accidental.
In I.1, the narrator describes the protagonist physically and
mentions where he lives, what types of activities he does, and what he
eats. Our hero resides in La Mancha, a very dry region of Spain known
for its very hot summers and very cold winters. His diet consists of beef
stew, salpicón,25 duelos y quebrantos,26 squab, and lentils. He is around
fifty and has a weathered, dried-out look to him. He is an early riser
and enjoys hunting. All of these factors were considered drying or heat-
producing according to humoral medicine, and all aided in the
production of yellow bile or choler. A predominance of yellow bile
caused a person to be excitable, overly enthusiastic, and choleric or
reactionary by nature. In extreme, however, too many yellow bile-
producing factors could cause the yellow bile to become burned, or
turn into black bile, which is the component of melancholy.
It is the books of chivalry that become the tipping point for a
character who was already choleric by nature and custom. Our
protagonist becomes so entranced with chivalric romances that he
overexcites his imagination. Compared to books of knowledge, chivalric
romances were criticized by scholars such as Erasmus and Juan Luis
Vives for distracting the mind from true learning and for provoking
foolish behaviour by causing the imagination to overreact.27 Huarte
also considered books of this genre to be works inspiring the
imagination, which impacted the choleric humour: ‘Estos [hombres] se
pierden por leer en libros de caballerías, en Orlando, en Boscán, en
Diana de Montemayor y otros así; porque todas éstas son obras de
imaginativa…los [hombres] que tienen mucha imaginativa son
coléricos, astutos, malinos, y cavilosos’ [‘These types of men lose
themselves 
in 
reading 
books 
of 
chivalry, 
Orlando, 
Boscan,
Montemayor’s Diana and others like them; because all of these are
works of the imagination…men that have a lot of imagination are
choleric, astute, malevolent, and duplicitous’].28 In addition to his
choice of reading material, which he reads to excess, the protagonist of
Don Quixote foregoes sleep, which was thought to moisten the brain
and restore balance. Cervantes has intentionally set the stage for what
happens next to the protagonist in I.1: ‘él se enfrascó tanto en su
lectura, que se le pasaban las noches leyendo de claro en claro, y los
días de turbio en turbio; y así, del poco dormir y del mucho leer, se le
secó el celebro, de manera que vino a perder el juicio’ [‘he became so
absorbed in his books that he spent his nights from sunset to sunrise,
and his days from dawn to dark, poring over them; and what with little
sleep and much reading his brains got so dry that he lost his wits’].29 It
is the choice of reading material combined with the lack of sleep and
excessive reading that tips Alonso Quixano over the edge.
Inspired by the books he has read, and with his imagination
overstimulated, ‘fue que le pareció convenible y necesario, así para el
aumento de su honra como para el servicio de su república, hacerse
caballero andante’ [‘he fancied it was right and requisite, as well for
the support of his own honour as for the service of his country, that he
should make a knight-errant of himself’].30 This fits with Huarte’s
observation that the choleric individual adored honour and vainglory.31
He believed that there were two types of melancholy: the first, lacking
in imagination, made men slow and dull. Melancholy stemming from
black bile, however, made individuals extremely wise. He related it to
the variability of vinegar, sometimes causing heat and at other times
cooling the body off, but noted it was always drying and therefore
caused a sharpening of the mind.32 Too much dryness and heat, as
mentioned above, made a person reactionary and prone to outbursts.
Too much dryness and cold caused sadness and deep despair. Huarte
believed that these imbalances were common in ingeniosos. Notably,
Don Quixote exhibits characteristics associated with both of these
temperaments throughout the course of his adventures. Onlookers
marvel repeatedly about this madman who is so knowledgeable, and
they are continuously surprised that someone acting so unsoundly
could provide such intelligent discourse. He is reactionary and
predisposed to violent outbursts when he interprets an act as
impertinent (as with the muleteer in I.4, the Biscayan squire in I.8, and
Sancho on several occasions). He chooses to fast on several occasions,
such as when he mentions to Sancho that ‘Es honra de los caballeros
andantes no comer en un mes’ [‘it is the glory of knights-errant to go
without eating for a month’].33 Although Don Quixote is following the
model set by literary knights errant, the act of eating and drinking is
one of the six non-naturals and essential to maintaining balance in the
body and, therefore, temperament. As the mad graduate of cannon law
from Osuna reaffirms in II.1, ‘todas nuestras locuras proceden de tener
los estómagos vacíos y los celebros llenos de aire’ [‘all this madness of
ours comes of having the stomach empty and the brains full of
wind’].34 Likewise, Don Quixote’s resistance to sleep, also in imitation
of chivalric knights, engenders the cooling and drying of the body and
further instability.
Heiple has observed that when Don Quixote suffers a bloodletting
(such as when he loses half an ear battling the Biscayan squire), one of
the prescribed cures for humoral imbalance, this alleviates his madness
temporarily, and it is why he is able to deliver his eloquent discourse
on the Golden Age. Likewise, it is after a long nap, where sleep restored
moisture to his brain, that Don Quixote gives his eloquent speech on
arms and letters.35 But where Huarte’s ingeniosos are successful, Don
Quixote in the end suffers defeat. Heiple speculates that the knight-
errant’s ultimate defeat occurs in Barcelona because it is cooler and
wetter; phlegmatic factors that contributed to his failure here.36 Soufas,
however, asserts that Don Quixote fails because Cervantes was
parodying Huarte’s vision of the exemplary ingenioso.37 She believed
Cervantes a proponent of the Catholic Church’s doctrine of free will,
which was something Huarte tangled with in his promotion of
biological determinism. By fashioning Don Quixote according to the
Huartian 
coordinates 
of 
an 
ingenioso, 
Cervantes 
parodies
predestination.38
Returning to a home empty of his chivalric romances, Don Quixote
is unable to sally out again due to the terms of his defeat at the hands
of the Knight of the White Moon. The narrator tells us that, ‘o ya fuese
de la melancolía que le causaba el verse vencido, o ya por la
disposición del cielo, que así lo ordenaba, se le arraigó una calentura
que le tuvo seis días en la cama’ [‘whether it was of the dejection the
thought of his defeat produced, or of heaven’s will that so ordered it, a
fever settled upon him and kept him in his bed for six days’].39 When
the fever breaks, Don Quixote is gone and Alonso Quixano has
returned, cured of his madness. As Aurora Egido observes, what started
out as a melancholy that yielded to choleric bouts has transitioned into
the melancholy associated with old age.40
Cultural Visions of Madness: Erasmus,
Bakhtin, and Foucault
Apart from understanding the humoral characteristics impacting
madness and how it was understood by doctors, there is also its
representation in literature to consider. In literary works from sixteenth
and seventeenth century Spain, madness was a somewhat fluid term,
interrelated with stupidity and foolishness, such as when used in
theatre. In 1611, Covarrubias’s dictionary Tesoro de la lengua castellana
o española defined a loco [madman] as someone who had lost his juyzio
[judgement]; in other words, it was a negative attribute. With the
Humanists, however, madness was also understood as a Christian
virtue. In 1509, Erasmus published his essay The Praise of Folly, which
mocked worldly value systems such as politics, pedantry, and social
hierarchy. The Praise of Folly was placed on the Inquisition’s list of
prohibited books in 1559, but judging by Hierónymo de Mondragón’s
very close imitation of it in his Censura de la locura humana y
excelencias della [Censure of Human Madness and the Excellence of It] in
1598, the Erasmian essay was still in circulation in Spain during
Cervantes’s lifetime. Although there has been much debate over how
much of an influence it had on Cervantes’s works,41 its reappraisal of
madness and depiction of the fool should be considered when analysing
characters who were considered non compos mentis in Cervantine
literature.
The essay gives voice to Moria,42 where she praises her universal
reach as well as her many good friends, one of whom is Anoia.43 The
spirit of madness is strongly equated to being human. Linking it to
foolishness, Erasmus writes that it ‘brings a great delight not only to
them that are possessed with it but to those also that behold it…[and] I
scarce know anyone in all mankind that is wise at all hours, or has not
some tang or other of madness’.44 Not only are folly and madness, or
being ‘out of one’s wits’, interrelated according to Erasmus, but they
are integral characteristics of what it means to be human and they are
also representative of the comic element of life. Foucault points out
that for Humanists such as Erasmus madness served as ‘the comic
punishment of knowledge and its ignorant presumption’.45 Rather than
celebrate only the rational aspects of the mind, society should embrace
as a part of humanity the less serious or dignified facets as well.
Erasmus satirizes social structures, in particular the pedants within the
Catholic Church. He also revisits St. Paul’s message in Corinthians
where we should all strive to be fools for Christ and not pay heed to
earthly entrapments or social conventions, since these went against
Christ’s vision of our mission on Earth.46
The holy fool lived to spread Christ’s message, foregoing earthly
comforts and social prestige. This archetype has been linked to Don
Quixote, particularly by those who interpret his continual humiliations
and betrayals as parallel to Christ’s sufferings.47 Similar to the holy
fool, but with more emphasis on humour, Erasmus’s Folly comes from a
long literary tradition of wise fools, stemming from Democritus,
Diogenes the Cynic, and Menippus. This figure of the laughing
philosopher appears prominently in the genre of Menippean satire and
is used as a device through which aspects of society can be safely
critiqued. Folly states, ‘the same thing which, if it came from a wise
man’s mouth might prove a capital crime, spoken by a fool is received
with delight’.48 Cervantes utilizes this type of device at times in Don
Quixote. For example, Sancho Panza and Don Quixote dialogue about
topics ranging from social mobility (I.7), just wages (I.7), and the
acquisition of eternal fame (II.8). Because Sancho has been labelled by
the narrator as simple-minded and foolish and Don Quixote is
understood to be mad, what surfaces as a critique on society is
tempered and not taken as seriously by the reader.
Where Cervantes more prominently utilizes the literary device of the
wise fool is in the exemplary novel El licenciado Vidriera. The
protagonist, Tomás Rodaja [Thomas Wedge], is a poor scholar who
unwittingly eats a wedge of a love potion-laced quince49 and this brings
on an epileptic-like seizure and then a lengthy, nearly fatal illness,
where his body dries out to the point of gauntness. As the narrator
points out, Tomás recovers physically but develops one of the strangest
forms of madness ever seen.50 In a psychoanalytical interpretation,
Garcés likens this to an unwanted sexual encounter and interprets
Tomás’s ensuing madness as a manner in which he can distance himself
from any type of reoccurrence of this kind.51 When Tomás recovers
from his physical ailments, he believes he is made of glass.52 He
protests violently to being touched, fashions sack-like garments to wear
as clothing, and refuses to wear shoes. He also changes his name to the
Licenciado Vidriera [the Glass Licentiate] and he now takes to walking
through the streets, where he is persecuted by street urchins and
followed by people requesting his advice. He explains that his increase
in intellect is because he is made of glass rather than flesh, something
that is sutil [refined], delicate, and allows the soul to work more
quickly and efficiently.53
The Glass Licentiate’s extreme intelligence, brought on by severe
illness, is similar to the description Huarte mentions in discussing both
the illness of Democritus and of a nobleman’s illiterate page who, after
a similar ailment, became eloquent and witty.54 Like the wise fools
preceding him, the Glass Licentiate offers strident advice and biting
commentary on both society as a whole and to those individuals he
encounters during his walks. Characters marvel at his astute
observations and seek him out for counsel. His language is satirical and
laughter-inciting. After a while, a priest takes pity on him and cures
him from his neurosis, at which point he changes his name once again,
this time to Tomás Rueda [Thomas Wheel]. He no longer believes he is
made of glass, but likewise he no longer spouts satiric commentary. He
attempts to work as a licentiate at Court, but the people only want his
witticisms and no one hires him. In the end he throws himself into war
as an enlisted soldier and dies in battle.
In his farewell speech before enlisting, Tomás criticizes society for
encouraging 
and 
supporting 
daring 
schemers 
and 
shameless
delinquents while casting aside and starving out the virtuous and
humble.55 His bitterness and frustration at being considered less useful
and underappreciated by society when sane in some ways echoes Don
Antonio’s reprimand when Sansón Carrasco has bested Don Quixote as
the Knight of the White Moon and has forced him to retreat to his
house: ‘¡Dios os perdone el agravio que habéis hecho a todo el mundo
en querer volver cuerdo al más gracioso loco que hay en él!’ [‘May God
forgive you the wrong you have done the whole world in trying to
bring the most amusing madman in it back to his senses!’].56 The
spectacle of madness, as embodied by Don Quixote and the Glass
Licentiate, is enjoyed and encouraged by most throughout the novel.
Without it, these two protagonists lose their appeal. Their madnesses
are reflective of those praised by Erasmus’s Folly and encourage
participation.
In Don Quixote and El licenciado Vidriera, there is a tolerance of
insane behaviour as well as the invitation for others to partake in it.
This encouragement and acceptance of madness is indicative of what
Bakhtin refers to when discussing the carnivalesque in literature, and it
frequently transpires in public domains because it is inclusive in nature.
The Glass Licentiate walks the streets, inviting dialogue and interaction
with everyone joining in on the discussion. In Part I, Don Quixote’s
friends the barber and the priest are all too eager to don foolish
disguises in order to trick Don Quixote into helping the Princess
Micomicona. In Part II, we are invited by the narrators to enjoy Sansón
Carrasco, who dresses up twice as a knight-errant to challenge Don
Quixote, and the duke and duchess and their attendants, who outdo
themselves to the point of ridiculousness in their attempts to enjoy Don
Quixote and Sancho’s behaviour. These are examples of a carnivalesque
understanding of madness, which was viewed as positive and universal,
as espoused by Erasmus’s Folly. Bakhtin observes, ‘Medieval Latin
humour found its final and complete expression at the highest level of
the Renaissance in Erasmus’s In Praise of Folly, one of the greatest
creations of carnival laughter in world literature’.57 This style of
madness likewise surfaced in Cervantine comedy and allowed for an
inversion of roles, if only temporarily, and the freedom for characters
to grow beyond their character types.
From this point of reference, madness and its contagious laughter
were considered to be a rejuvenating and all-inclusive element of the
carnivalesque. In contrast, Avellaneda’s 1614 continuation of Don
Quixote showcases a top-down, demeaning humour that sought to
maintain the status quo of its characters.58 This counterfeit Don
Quixote is derided, played the fool, and continuously humiliated. At the
end of the novel, he is abandoned by Sancho for the Court, and his
good friend Don Alvaro Tarfe leaves him in Toledo’s hospital for the
insane, La Casa del Nuncio. In contrast to the more positive, integrating
attitude towards Don Quixote in the original version, Avellaneda’s
novel sought to control and debase imbalanced and impertinent
characters. The symptoms exhibited by the two Don Quixotes are also
different. The original’s intelligence balances out his delusional actions.
The apocryphal Don Quixote never proffers intelligent discourse and
the way he acts out his madness more clearly resembles Cardenio’s
madness in the Sierra Morena wilderness: both he and Cardenio are
prone to unprovoked violent outbursts. Both also suffer what Palma
and Palma have identified as absence seizures, where an individual
stops abruptly and gazes fixedly off into space for a period of time.59
But where Avellaneda’s Don Quixote is punished for his violent acts,
Cardenio is shown compassion by the shepherds, and his madness
resolves itself without intervention as soon as he leaves the
mountainside and returns to civilization.60
In Avellaneda’s edition, Don Quixote is always mentally unstable
and, although Don Alvaro at times pities him and ultimately decides it
would be better for society as well as Don Quixote if he were placed in
an insane asylum, the majority of characters the knight-errant
encounters regard him as socially inferior and treat him likewise. In
Cervantes’s Part II, the duke and duchess embody this attitude of social
hierarchy, but they go to such great lengths to make fools of Don
Quixote and Sancho that they inadvertently become the spectacle of
ridiculousness for the reader. When Sansón informs the duke that Don
Quixote is heading home after his defeat in Barcelona, the duke plans
to make Don Quixote and Sancho stop at his castle either willingly or
by force and goes out of his way to prepare a spectacle in which Don
Quixote and Sancho will unwittingly be used as buffoons. In contrast to
the positive light in which Avellaneda casts his aristocratic jokesters,
Cervantes exposes those in authority who encourage madness-as-sport.
Regarding all of the duke and duchess’s preparations for Don
Quixote and Sancho’s return, Cide Hamete Bengeli remarks ‘que tiene
para sí ser tan locos los burladores como los burlados y que no estaban
los duques dos dedos de aparecer tontos, pues tanto ahínco ponían en
burlarse de dos tontos’ [‘that for his part he considers the concocters of
the joke as crazy as the victims of it, and that the duke and duchess
were not two fingers’ breadth removed from being something like fools
themselves when they took such pains to make game of a pair of
fools’].61 Rather than upholding this social hierarchy, as Avellaneda
does, Cervantes calls attention to it and, via the narrators, guides the
reader to a different conclusion than that offered by Avellaneda. As
Iffland observes, ‘Much of what occurs in the palace of the duke and
duchess would seem to constitute a direct reply to the “courtly
strategy” of Avellaneda, showing him that he—Cervantes—is also
perfectly capable of inventing “adventures” of this type, and that he
does it even better, that is, with greater ingenuity and sophistication’.62
Cervantes’s protagonists show more independence and are afforded
more dignity than their apocryphal counterparts.
Although Avellaneda’s novel serves as only one author’s perception
of the relationship between a mentally imbalanced character and his
society, this example highlights the complexity that exists in Cervantine
literature regarding the relationships between those considered
unsound of mind and the other characters with whom they interact.
Cervantes draws attention to his character’s ability to transcend the
madman typecast by the way in which other characters react when Don
Quixote acts different than what is expected. Almost all of the
characters Don Quixote encounters on his journey consider him mad,
but when he speaks with eloquence, composure, and intelligence, that
is to say, when he acts in a manner that defies their preconceived
notion of a madman, they act amazed. Through the reactions of his
characters, Cervantes challenges the loco stereotype, such as when
other characters are filled with wonder when regarding Don Quixote’s
madness (e.g. the barber and priest in I.26, the canon in I.49, the
goatherd in I.52, the labourers transporting the saintly images in II.58),
and when Don Diego de Miranda’s son opines, ‘No le sacarán del
borrador de su locura cuantos médicos y buenos escribanos tiene el
mundo: él es un entreverado loco, lleno de lúcidos intervalos’ [‘All the
doctors and clever scribes in the world will not make sense of the
scrawl of his madness; he is a madman full of streaks, full of lucid
intervals’].63 His madness is also rousing and provocative, inspiring
characters such as Sancho, the barber and priest, Sansón Carrasco, the
duke and duchess, and Altisidora to participate in it. Cervantes weaves
carnivalesque elements into the storyline by enabling his characters to
surpass traditional character types and by incorporating group
participation in many of the humorous events that occur.
Carnivalesque madness and folly surface within the majority of
Cervantine texts, and especially in Don Quixote, but there are also
examples of destructive madness that do not fit within the
carnivalesque tradition and are indicative instead of the shift into the
modern era. Foucault studied how the dynamic between a society and
those labelled delusional or deranged transitioned from an inclusive
coexistence during medieval France to a culture that marginalized and
ultimately rejected these individuals as being non-productive members,
and therefore useless, in an Enlightened and then Industrialized
civilization. This sociohistorical analysis of madness has in turn been
applied to medieval and early modern Spanish literature; although
Shuger asserts that France was ahead of Spain in its push to separate
the disturbed from the general public and that this tendency was not as
prevalent in Spain until well into the seventeenth century.64 In much of
Cervantine literature, madness is frequently humanized and is allowed
to disrupt social order. In his relatives’ and friends’ quest to capture
Don Quixote and bring him home, for example, they do so because they
are worried about him, but they do not describe him as dangerous nor
consider the possibility of taking him to an insane asylum. The priest,
the barber, Sansón Carrasco, and definitely the duke and duchess do
enjoy the spectacle that Don Quixote’s madness provides, but they are
careful not to laugh in his face nor openly disrespect him. Nonetheless,
there are other Cervantine characters whose madness is destructive
rather than rejuvenating and therefore do not fit within the realm of
the carnivalesque.
Cervantes’s approach to Extreme Passions:
Suicide and Jealousy
In the interpolated story El curioso impertinente, Anselmo suffers from a
self-diagnosed obsession and explains to his best friend Lotario,
‘Padezco ahora la enfermedad que suelen tener algunas mujeres, que se
les antoja comer tierra, yeso, carbón y otras cosas peores, aun
asquerosas para mirarse, cuanto más para comerse’ [‘I am now
labouring under that infirmity which women sometimes suffer from,
when the craving seizes them to eat clay, plaster, charcoal, and things
even worse, disgusting to look at, much more to eat’].65 He likens the
strong yearning associated with this disorder, what would in present
times be diagnosed as pica, as similar to his severe preoccupation with
testing his wife Camila’s loyalty. Anselmo begs his best friend Lotario
to help him discover whether Camila really is as discreet and faithful as
her reputation purports. But ultimately, it is Anselmo’s obsession that
drives Lotario and Camila into each other’s arms and all three parties
end up suffering from love melancholy that leads to an untimely end.
Anselmo allows himself to die once he realizes what he has done and
acknowledges that this entire situation has come about because ‘un
necio e impertinente deseo me quitó la vida’ [‘a foolish and ill-advised
desire has robbed me of life’].66 Camila, likewise, surrenders her will to
live rather than continue living with a broken heart. Lotario, unable to
come to terms with his love for Camila and his betrayal of Anselmo,
enlists as a soldier and throws himself into battle, where he dies.
Although all three methods of death were common and accepted within
literature, all reflect a choice of death and destruction over life.
The theme of suicide also surfaces with Grisóstomo in Don Quixote
I.14. In his poem ‘La canción desesperada’ [‘The Song of Despair’], he
lets Marcela know in no uncertain terms that he is choosing death over
life because of his unrequited love for her. Avalle-Arce reviews whether
Grisóstomo’s death should be interpreted as suicide or whether it was
simply due to love melancholy. He cites Covarrubias, who defined
desesperarse as killing one’s self out of spite, which constitutes a sin
against the Holy Spirit.67 ‘La canción desesperada’, therefore, could be
interpreted as a suicide note. In the sixth stanza of the poem,
Grisóstomo states that, due to Marcela’s disdain, he will make use of a
noose and end his pain, understanding that in doing so he foregoes
proper treatment from the Catholic Church.68 But Cervantes is
ambiguous here. It is true that Grisóstomo is not buried in hallowed
ground, which has been interpreted as proof of suicide,69 but this is
because he wishes to be buried in the spot in the woods where he first
laid eyes on Marcela. Since Catholic doctrine believes that suicide
eternally damns the person’s soul, it stands to reason that, as
Covarrubias concludes in his definition of desesperarse, no one in their
right mind would choose to commit suicide. This sentiment is echoed
by Sancho, when he tells Alonso Quixano on his deathbed, ‘la mayor
locura que puede hacer un hombre en esta vida es dejarse morir, sin
más ni más, sin que nadie le mate, ni otras manos le acaben que las de
la melancolía’ [‘the foolishest thing a man can do in this life is to let
himself die without rhyme or reason, without anybody killing him, or
any hands but melancholy’s making an end of him’].70 Whether or not
Grisóstomo committed suicide is left up to the interpretation of the
reader, but his death as well as those of Anselmo, Camila, and Lotario
in El curioso impertinente, are representative of the deleterious madness
linked to excessive melancholy.
A different angle on suicide is presented in Cervantes’s historical
tragedy La Numancia, where the madness of mass suicide is represented
as a heroic virtue. Rather than be enslaved by the uncompromising,
relentless Romans, all the Numantians choose to end their lives. The
basic instinct of self-preservation is superseded by the value of freedom.
Understood from within the framework of liberty, Cervantes emends
the act of taking one’s life and in this instance it can be interpreted
more than as an act of insanity but rather as noble and justifiable.
Jealousy is another emotion like sadness that, when left
unmoderated, can drive a character to unhealthy extremes. Often
present in theatre, this emotion furthers the plot while eliciting strong
reactions from the audience. When not thwarted or ameliorated, it
becomes a vehicle, driving characters into rash, foolish obsessions. In
the exemplary novel El celoso extremeño, jealousy is pushed past its
conventional limits into obsession. Here, Cervantes explores the social
mores of jealousy, specifically as it related to the sixteenth-century
Spanish understanding of honour and the reputation of a family’s
name, which was based on the purity and faithfulness of the female(s)
in the household. Sixty-eight-year old Filipo de Carrizales, whom the
narrator describes as the most jealous man in the world even before he
marries,71 becomes even more so after nuptials and confines his young,
beautiful wife Leonora to the interior of the house, where she has no
contact with the outer world and can only interact with female servants
and a eunuch. Under the guise of protecting her from the outside
world, Carrizales has taken every precaution to seal Leonora away from
any type of temptation or possible cause of besmirchment, which might
inflame his jealousy. However, the lengths to which he goes, instead of
representing the social ideal, belie an obsession that is ultimately held
up to criticism by Cervantes.72
Even after all of his extreme actions to limit Leonora’s contact with
the outer world and thereby greatly reduce her lifestyle, Carrizales’s
plan ultimately fails when he finds her in bed with the musician Loaysa
and assumes that she has slept with him. Although Carrizales’s initial
reaction is to take revenge on Leonora and Loaysa, because what he
sees ignites a choleric response, the pain that accompanies this leaves
him breathless. He returns to his room and collapses in a faint due to
the agony and anguish he feels in his heart.73 In an unexpected twist
that differs from most revenge stories, however, when he awakens he
decides that the only individual who should suffer from revenge here
should be him, declaring that his jealousy is the reason that all of this
has come to pass and that he himself has been the creator of the poison
that is taking his life.74 He then forgives Leonora, makes his will, and
within seven days passes away.
Francisco de Villalobos, Court doctor to Kings Ferdinand the
Catholic and Charles V, wrote about the destructive effects of jealousy
in his Sumario de medicina and in ‘Canción de Villalobos’. He discusses
amor hereos [lovesickness] as well as jealousy. Linking jealousy to
tyranny, greed, pride, envy, and lust, Villalobos warns that those ruled
by these passions die in service to the devil because they allow
themselves to lose hope (se desesperan) and kill themselves.75 In El
celoso extremeño, jealousy pushed to its extreme becomes a form of
destructive madness that consumes its vassal.76
Humoral imbalance, dietary changes, extreme passions; external
factors and internal elements impacting the mind; madness in
Cervantine literature is not static but rather dialectical and in flux. And
although the characters are fictional, they have a tangible realness to
which readers easily relate. Critics have spent the past four hundred
years attempting to explain the universal appeal of Cervantes’s works,
especially that of Don Quixote. Drawing from the literary and historical
environment of seventeenth-century Spain, Cervantes embraced all
aspects of humanity, including the ideal and the imperfect, the
intentional and accidental, and the cuerdo and the loco. His astute
observations of human nature aided him in infusing his characters with
believable personalities. He also encouraged the rejuvenating madness
found in carnivalesque culture while he explored the destructive side of
madness representing Spain’s transition into modern times.
Works Cited
Aguiar, Gustavo Illades. ‘Dos pacientes virtuales del médico Francisco de
Villalobos: Anselmo y Carrizales’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of
America 19, no. 2 (1999): pp. 101–12.
Avalle-Arce, Juan Batista. ‘La “canción desesperada” de Grisóstomo’. Nueva
Revista de Filología Hispánica 11, no. 4 (Apr–Jun., 1957): pp. 193–8.
Bakhtin, Mikhail. Rabelais and his World, translated by Hélène Iswolsky
(Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1984).
Bailón-Blancas, José Manuel. Cervantes y la psiquiatría: La histeria en ‘El
licenciado Vidriera’ (Madrid: Necodisne, 2000).
Bailón-Blancas, José Manuel. Historia clínica del caballero don Quijote (Madrid:
Gráficas Cañizares, 1993).
Bailón-Blancas, José Manuel. ‘Un modelo de depresión neurótica en la obra de
Cervantes: el curioso impertinente’. In Actas del II Congreso Internacional de la
Asociación de Cervantistas, edited by Giuseppe Grilli (Nápoles: Istituto
Universitario Orientale, 1995): pp. 463–86.
Bataillon, Marcel. Erasmo y el erasmismo (Barcelona: Crítica, 1983): pp. 327–47.
Castilla del Pino, Carlos. Cordura y locura en Cervantes. (Barelona: Península,
2005): pp. 59–81.
Castro, Américo. ‘Erasmo en tiempos de Cervantes.’ Hacía Cervantes (Madrid:
Taurus, 1960): pp. 193–230.
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Don Quixote, translated by John Ormsby. Project
Gutenberg. EBook #996. (Published March 4, 2015), n.p. http://
www.gutenberg.org/files/996/996-h/996-h.htm.
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. El ingenioso hidalgo don Quijote de la Mancha.
Project Gutenberg. Etext #2000. (Published December 1999), n.p. https://
www.gutenberg.org/files/2000/2000-h/2000-h.htm.
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Novelas ejemplares. Mobile Read: Florencio
Sevilla 
Arroyo. 
(Published 
15 
July 
2015), 
n.p. 
http://
libros.metabiblioteca.org/bitstream/001/154/9/Novelas%20ejemplares%20-
%20Miguel%20de%20Cervantes%20Saavedra.pdf.
Covarrubias Orozco, Sebastián de. Tesoro de la lengua castellana o española
(Madrid: Luís Sanchez, 1611). https://archive.org/details/A253315.
Davis, Alex. Chivalry and Romance in the English Renaissance (Cambridge: DS
Brewer, 2003).
Durán, Manuel. ‘El Quijote a través del prisma de Mikhail Bakhtin: carnaval,
disfraces, escatología y locura.’ In Cervantes and the Renaissance, edited by
Michael D. McGaha (Easton, PA: Juan de la Cuesta, 1980): pp. 71–86.
Egido, Aurora. ‘La memoria y el Quijote’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes
Society of America 11, no.1 (1991): pp. 3–44.
Eisenberg, Daniel. ‘La biblioteca de Cervantes: Una reconstrucción’. Versión
preliminar 
a 
2002. 
https://www.academia.edu/26165618/
La_biblioteca_de_Cervantes_una_reconstrucci%C3%B3n.
El Saffar, Ruth Anthony. Novel to Romance: A Study of Cervantes’s Novelas
ejemplares (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 1974).
Erasmus, Desiderius. The Praise of Folly, translated by John Wilson. Project
Gutenberg Ebook #9371.
Fajardo, Diógenes. ‘Erasmo y Don Quijote de la Mancha’. Centro virtual Cervantes:
Thesaurus 40, no. 3 (1985): pp. 604–19. https://cvc.cervantes.es/lengua/
thesaurus/pdf/40/TH_40_003_120_0.pdf.
Feal, Carol. ‘Against the Law: Mad Lovers in Don Quixote’. In Quixotic Desire:
Psychoanalytic Perspectives on Cervantes, edited by Ruth Anthony El Saffar and
Diana de Armas Wilson (Ithica: Cornell UP, 1993): pp. 179–99.
Fernández de Avellaneda, Alonso. El ingenioso hidalgo don Quijote de la Mancha
(Barcelona: Poliedro, 2005).
Forcione, Alban Keith. Cervantes and the Humanist Vision: A Study of Four
Exemplary Novels (Princeton, NJ: Princeton UP, 1982).
Foucault, Michel. History of Madness, edited by Jean Khalfa, translated by
Jonathan Murphy and Jean Khalfa (London: Routledge, 2006).
Garcés, María Antonia. ‘Delirio y obscenidad en Cervantes: el caso Vidriera.’
Actas de los Congresos de la Asociación Internacional de Hispanistas 12 (1995):
pp. 225–36.
Gilman, Stephen. Cervantes y Avellaneda: Estudio de una imitación (DF: Colegio
de México, 1951).
Green, Otis H. ‘El ingenioso hidalgo’. Hispanic Review XXV (1957): pp. 175–93.
Heiple, Daniel. ‘El licenciado Vidriera y el humor tradicional del loco’. Hispania
66, no. 1 (1983): pp. 17–20.
Heiple, Daniel. ‘Renaissance Medical Psychology in Don Quijote’. Ideologies and
Literatures 2, no. 9 (1979): pp. 65–72.
Huarte de San Juan, Juan. Examen de ingenios para las ciencias [1594].
Reproduced in Electroneurobiología 3, no. 2 (1996): pp. 1–322. http://
electroneubio.secyt.gov.ar/
Juan_Huarte_de_San_Juan_Examen_de_ingenios.htm.
Iffland, James. De fiestas y aguafiestas: Risa, locura e ideología en Cervantes y
Avellaneda. (Madrid: Iberoamericana, 1999).
Iffland, James. ‘Do We Really Need to Read Avellaneda?’ Cervantes: Bulletin of
the Cervantes Society of America 21, no. 1 (2001): pp. 67–83.
Iriarte, Mauricio de. El Doctor Huarte De San Juan Y Su Examen De Ingenios
(Madrid: Ediciones Jerarquía, 1939).
Iriarte, Mauricio de. ‘”El ingenioso hidalgo” y El examen de ingenios: qué debe
Cervantes al Dr. Huarte de San Juan.’ Revista Internacional de los Estudios
Vascos/Revue Internationale des Etudes Basques 24 (1933): pp. 499–522. http://
hedatuz.euskomedia.org/1688.
Johnson, Carroll. Madness and Lust: A Psychoanalytical Approach to Don Quixote
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983).
López Alonso, Carmen. Locura y sociedad en Sevilla: Historia del Hospital de los
Inocentes (1436–1840) (Sevilla: Diputación Provincial, 1988).
López-Muñoz, Francisco and Cecilio Álamo. ‘Sobre las fuentes médicas de
Cervantes’. Humanidades médicas. JANO 1644 (2007): pp. 54–6.
Mondragón, Hierónymo de. Censura de la locura humana i escelencias della
(Lérida: Antonio de Robles, 1598). https://play.google.com/books/reader?
printsec=frontcover&output=reader&id=hOkN_lZFd3YC&pg=GBS.PT10.
Palma, Jose-Alberto and Fermin Palma. ‘Neurology and Don Quixote’. European
Neurology. 
68 
(2012): 
pp. 
247–57. 
https://www.karger.com/Article/
FullText/341338.
Pérez-Álvarez, Marino. ‘Psychology in Don Quixote’. Psychology in Spain 10, no
1 (2006): pp. 17–27.
Price, Robin. ‘Spanish Medicine in the Golden Age’. Journal of the Royal Society
of Medicine. 72 (1979): pp. 864–974.
Read, Malcolm. Juan Huarte de San Juan (Boston: Twayne Publishers, 1981).
Salillas, Rafael. Un gran inspirador de Cervantes, el doctor Juan Huarte y su
Examen de ingenios (Madrid: Eduardo Arias, 1905).
Sampayo Rodríguez, José Ramón. Rasgos erasmistas de la locura del Licenciado
Vidriera de Miguel de Cervantes (Kassel: Reichenberger, 1986).
Shuger, Dale. Don Quixote in the Archives: Madness and Literature in Early Modern
Spain (Edinburgh: Edinburgh UP, 2012).
Soufas, Teresa Scott. Melancholy and the Secular Mind in Spanish Golden Age
Literature (Columbia: U of Missouri Press, 1990).
Speak, Gill. ‘An Odd Kind of Melancholy: Reflections on the Glass Delusion in
Europe (1440–1680)’. History of Psychiatry 2, no. 2 (1990): pp. 191–206.
doi:10.1177/0957154X9000100203. 
http://hpy.sagepub.com/
content/1/2/191.
Tropé, Hélène. ‘Inquisición y locura en la España de los siglos XVI y XVII’.
Bulletin of Spanish Studies 87, no. 8 (2010): pp. 57–79.
Tropé, Hélène. Locura y sociedad en la Valencia de los siglos XV la XVII: los locos
del Hospital de los Inocentes (1409–1512) y del Hospital General (1512–1699).
(Valencia: Diputación de Valencia, Centre d’Estudis d’História Local, 1994).
Tropé, Hélène. ‘Los tratamientos de la locura en la España de los siglos XV al
XVII: El caso de Valencia’. Frenia 11 (2011): pp. 27–46.
Unamundo, Miguel de. La vida de don Quijote y Sanch. (Madrid: Cátedra, 1988).
‘Vidriera.’ Diccionario de Autoridades (Madrid: Real Academia Española, 2012).
Accessed August 17, 2015. http://web.frl.es/DA.html.
Vilanova, Antonio. Erasmo y Cervantes. (Barcelona: Lumen, 1989).
Villalobos, Francisco de. ‘Canción de Villalobos, con su glosa’. In Algunas obras
del doctor Francisco López de Villalobos: obras literarias (Madrid: La sociedad de
Bibliófilos españoles, 1886), pp. 202–15.
Villalobos, Francisco de. ‘Sumario de la medicina.’ In Algunas obras del doctor
Francisco López de Villalobos: obras científicas (Madrid: La sociedad de
Bibliófilos españoles, 1886), pp. 109–27.
Wagschal, Steven. The Literature of Jealousy in the Age of Cervantes (Columbia: U
of Missouri Press, 2007).
Ziolkowski, Eric J. The Sanctification of Don Quixote: from Hidalgo to Priest
(University Park: Penn State Press, 1991).
1 Although the majority of Cervantine characters considered mad are male,
there are two female characters who fall into this realm: Isabela Castrucha in
Persiles y Sigismunda, who feigns what the doctor describes as either madness or
possession (III.20), and Camila, who allows herself to die in El curioso
impertinente in Don Quixote (I.35).
2 Forcione discusses how madness was linked to motion and change during
Cervantes’s time.
3 See Johnson as well as Bailón-Blancas, a psychiatrist who diagnoses the
types of disorders from which the characters Don Quixote, Anselmo, and Tomás
Rodaja suffer. Psychopathologist Castilla del Pino analyses madness from a
medical point of view. More recently, neurologists Palma and Palma offer their
interpretation of maladies that appear in Don Quixote from a neurological
perspective.
4 See Tropé, ‘Locura y sociedad’ and ‘Los tratamientos…’.
5 Foucault, p. 117.
6 See Tropé ‘Inquisición y locura…’ and Locura y sociedad…and López.
Shuger also discusses how obligations of charity towards asylum patients were
viewed in sixteenth-century Spain.
7 Unless otherwise specified, all translations into English are mine.
8 Tropé, ‘Los tratamientos…’, p. 30.
9 See Shuger as well as Tropé’s works mentioned in footnote 6.
10 See especially Part I.
11 Price as well as López-Muñoz and Álamo offer a general summary of many
of the medical publications during this time period.
12 See Eisenberg, ‘La biblioteca…’.
13 A few examples include Francisco de Villalobo’s El Sumario de la medicina
(1498), Juan Luis Vives’s De anima et vita (1538) and Vergel de sanidad (1542),
Luís de Lobrera de Avila’s Remedios de cuerpos humanos (1542), Alfonso de
Santa Cruz’s Diagnotio et cura affectuum melancholium (1569), Francisco Núñez
de Oria’s Aviso de sanidad (1572), Agustín Farfán’s Tratado breve de medicina
(1579), Andrés Velázquez’s Libro de la melancholia (1585), and Alonso de
Freylas’s Conocimiento, curación y preservación de la peste (1606).
14 This title has been translated into English two different ways, The
Examination of Men’s Wits and The Examination of Talents for the Professions, but
neither fully captures what Huarte meant by ingenio. The modern usage of
genius is a closer approximation. This is discussed in further detail below.
15 See Green, Iriarte, and Salillas.
16 See Soufas, Chapter 1.
17 See Heiple ‘Renaissance Medical…’ and Read.
18 See Heiple, ‘Renaissance Medical…’ for an excellent commentary on all of
these treatises.
19 The six non-naturals, or the causes of good health and illness, consisted of
ambient air, food and drink, exercise and inactivity, sleep and wakefulness,
excretion and repletion, and emotional disturbances.
20 Huarte, Prosíguese el Segundo Proemio, p. 30.
21 ‘La prudencia y buena maña del ánima racional nace de la cólera; ser
entero el hombre y constante proviene del humor melancólico; ser bobo y
simple, de la sangre; de la flema, para ninguna cosa se aprovecha el ánima
racional, más que para dormir’ [‘Prudence and good aptitude from the rational
soul is born from choler; wholeness and constancy in man hails from
melancholy; stupidity and simplicity, from blood; from phlegm, the rational
soul receives nothing of benefit save sleeping’] (Capítulo VIII, p. 104).
22 Huarte’s use of this word can be translated into English as wit, talent, gift,
ability, nature, or ingenuity, depending on the context in which it is used in
Examen.
23 ‘dijo Platón que por maravilla se halla hombre de muy subido ingenio que
no pique algo en manía’ [‘Plato said that it is a rarity to find a man of great
intellect who is safe from any caprice’] (Prosíguese el Segundo Proemio, p. 33).
24 Covarrubias defines ingenioso as someone having subtle and fine ingenio,
which was ‘una fuerza natural de entendimiento investigadora’ [‘a natural,
investigative force of intellect’] (p. 504v).
25 Ground beef seasoned with onion, pepper, salt, and vinegar.
26 Scrambled eggs mixed with chorizo sausage and bacon.
27 Davis, pp. 13–16.
28 Huarte, Capítulo X, p. 138.
29 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, I.1; Don Quixote, p. 41.
30 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, I.1; Don Quixote p. 41.
31 ‘El colérico, según la [templanza] irascible, adora la honra [y] la
vangloria’ [‘The choleric man, prone to irascible temperament, adores honour
and vainglory’] (Prosíguese el segundo proemio, p. 29).
32 Huarte, p. 163.
33 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, I.10; Don Quixote, p. 77.
34 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, Don Quixote, p. 360.
35 Heiple, ‘Renaissance Medical…,’ p. 69.
36 Heiple, ‘Renaissance Medical…,’ p. 67.
37 Soufas, pp. 31–3.
38 Soufas, p. 32.
39 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, II.74; Don Quixote, p. 692.
40 Egido, p. 4.
41 See Bataillon, Castro, and Vilanova. Fajardo provides an excellent
summary of key criticism relating to this topic up to 1985.
42 Greek for foolishness or folly.
43 Greek for mindlessness or incapacity to use one’s mind, but often
translated into English as madness.
44 Erasmus, p. 53.
45 Foucault, p. 23.
46 Erasmus quotes Paul liberally with regard to Christ’s vision that it is those
deemed foolish by society that are preferred by God because they are inured to
social constraints and man-made value systems and instead are more concerned
about living like Christ. Quoting 1 Corinthians 4:10, Folly reminds the reader
that Paul states, ‘We are fools for Christ’s sake’ (p. 112). In another example,
Folly quotes Paul, ‘“If anyone among ye,” says he, “seem to be wise, let him be
a fool that he may be wise”’ (p. 113, quoting 1 Corinthians 3:18).
47 Unamuno understands Don Quixote to be a Spanish Christ. Ziolkowski
explores the association of Don Quixote with the holy fool, especially how this
understanding impacted future writers like Fields and Dostoyevsky. His
conclusion is that Don Quixote should not be considered a holy fool because he
sought eternal glory and fame, which were not part of Christ’s mission (pp.
122–5).
48 Erasmus, p. 49.
49 Cervantes uses the spell-as-catalyst-to-madness in one other occasion,
which is when Domicio dons a cursed robe and becomes violently aggressive in
Persiles y Sigismunda, III.15.
50 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, p. 312.
51 Garcés, p. 229.
52 There were several recorded cases during the Renaissance of people who
believed they were made of glass, including King Charles IV of France.
53 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, p. 313.
54 Huarte, p. 92.
55 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, p. 338.
56 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, II.65; Don Quixote, p. 661.
57 Bakhtin, p. 14.
58 See Iffland, De fiestas…for a more in-depth analysis of how Avellaneda’s
vision of Don Quixote and Sancho Panza differs from Cervantes’s vision; see
also Gilman.
59 Palma, p. 251.
60 For a psychoanalytical interpretation of Cardenio’s madness, see Feal.
61 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, II.70; Don Quixote, p. 679.
62 Iffland, ‘Do We Really…’, p. 79.
63 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, II.18; Don Quixote, p. 439.
64 See Shuger, Chapter 1 for further analysis of this topic.
65 Cervantes, El ingenioso…., I.33; Don Quixote, p. 229.
66 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, I.35; Don Quixote, p. 250.
67 ‘desesperarse es matarse de qualquiera manera por despecho; pecado
contra el Espiritu Santo. No se les da a los tales sepultura, queda su memoria
infamada, y sus bienes confiscados: y lo peor de todo es que van a hazer
compañia a Judas. Esto no se entiende de los que estando fuera de juyzio lo
hizieron, como los locos o freneticos.’ [‘desesperarse is to kill oneself out of spite
no matter which form it takes; a sin against the Holy Spirit. Suicides are not
given a burial, their memory is defamed, and their goods confiscated: and worst
of all they will keep Judas company. Those judged out of their minds, such as
madmen or frenetics, are the exception to this.’], (Covarrubias, p. 309v, s.v.
desesperarse).
68 ‘Y, con esta opinión y un duro lazo
acelerando el miserable plazo
a que me han conducido sus desdenes
ofreceré a los vientos cuerpo y alma
sin lauro o palma de futuros bienes’ (I.14).
69 Castro, p. 239.
70 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, II.74; Don Quixote, p. 694.
71 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, p. 370.
72 El Saffar categorizes Carrizales as suffering from solipsism, or egocentricity
(pp. 40–5).
73 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, p. 409.
74 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, p. 413.
75 Villalobos, ‘Canción de Villalobos’, pp. 207–8.
76 For a more in-depth analysis of Villalobos’s possible influence in
Cervantes’s construction of Carrizales and Anselmo, see Aguiar.
Chapter 14
Cervantes and Genre
Brian Brewer
Trinity College Dublin
In Don Quixote I.47 and 48, Cervantes sets out his most sustained
exposition of literary theory. My purpose here is not to survey the
critical debates that have erupted regarding the sincerity of these
aesthetic principles, still less to rehash the arguments pro and contra,
but, instead, to point out that the dialogue staged in these chapters
between the canon from Toledo and the priest from Don Quixote’s
village contains in embryonic form the primary tensions that infuse
Cervantes’s attitude toward literary genre as revealed in his fiction.1
The critical exchange is divided into two parts: the canon’s critique of
the romances of chivalry that have caused Don Quixote’s insanity, and
the priest’s appraisal of the state of contemporary popular theatre. In
both cases, which are complementary, the characters’ criticisms are
harsh without being completely uncompromising. Also in both cases,
the artistic precepts expounded accurately describe Cervantes’s actual
practice of composing literary fiction, with the non-trivial caveat that
they also contain important limitations.
In his remarks on the romances of chivalry, the canon repeatedly
denounces their ‘disparates’ [absurdities] and failure to conform to the
prescriptions of ‘arte’, ‘reglas’, and ‘preceptos’ [art, rules, and precepts].
These latter are derived from the theoretical debates which stemmed
from the Renaissance’s critical engagement with Aristotle’s Poetics and
Horace’s Ars Poetica. The canon, following contemporary convention,
privileges unity-in-variety, verisimilitude, decorum, rhetorical polish,
and pleasurable instruction above the ‘monstrous’ aberrations of the
structurally disjointed, unrealistic (understood as both preposterously
impossible and lacking truth-to-type in literary characterization),
unrefined, and unedifying romances. Nevertheless, the canon still
allows for the perfectibility of the romance, provided it were purged of
its outrages against good taste:
[C]on todo cuanto mal había dicho de tales libros, hallaba en ellos una
cosa buena, que era el sujeto que ofrecían para que un buen
entendimiento pudiese mostrarse en ellos, porque daban largo y
espacioso campo por donde sin empacho alguno pudiese correr la
pluma, describiendo naufragios, tormentas, rencuentros y batallas,
pintando un capitán valeroso con todas las partes que para ser tal se
requieren…pintando ora un lamentable y trágico suceso, ahora un
alegre y no pensado acontecimiento; allí una hermosísima dama,
honesta, discreta y recatada; aquí un caballero cristiano, valiente y
comedido; acullá un desaforado bárbaro fanfarrón; acá un príncipe
cortés, valeroso y bien mirado; representando bondad y lealtad de
vasallos, grandezas y mercedes de señores. Ya puede mostrarse
astrólogo, ya cosmógrafo excelente, ya músico, ya inteligente en las
materias de estado, y tal vez le vendrá ocasión de mostrarse
nigromante, si quisiere.2
[[D]espite all his strictures on such books he did find one positive
quality in them: they provided subject matter with which a good
intelligence could express itself, because they made available a broad
and spacious canvas on which the pen could wander unhindered,
describing shipwrecks, storms, skirmishes and battles; portraying an
exemplary captain with all the necessary characteristics…depicting now
a lamentable and tragic event, now a happy and unexpected one, there
a lovely lady, virtuous, intelligent and demure, here a Christian knight,
brave and courteous, there a reckless braggart of a barbarian, here a
worthy, polite and considerate prince; representing goodness and
loyalty in vassals, grandness and generosity in lords. The author can
show himself to be an astrologer, a skilled cosmographer, a musician,
knowledgeable about affairs of state, and perhaps he will even have an
opportunity to show himself to be a magician, if he so wishes.]3
As Alban Forcione, amongst many others, has pointed out, this sketch
of the perfect prose romance describes Cervantes’s own final work,
Persiles y Sigismunda.4 I should like to propose that it also succinctly
outlines Cervantes’s entire practice of creative prose fiction, which is
predicated upon a critical engagement with heroic romance narratives
and the inclusion of multiple, overlapping, and competing literary and
non-literary discourses. This is true of Cervantes’s first published work,
the pastoral novel La Galatea, which maintains a serious meta-literary
dialogue with the courtly and Petrarchan tropes of erotic fiction, and in
which the bucolic idyll is violently interrupted by the introduction of
real-world socioeconomic concerns that threaten the happy resolution
of the story’s central love conflict.5 It is equally applicable to the
posthumously published Persiles y Sigismunda, which offers a sustained
engagement with both Renaissance literary theory and contemporary
moral, theological, and political issues.6 Don Quixote and the Novelas
ejemplares most obviously reflect this characteristic interplay of
romance tropes and discursive multiplicity, however. These are the
works that have received the most critical attention in this regard, and
it is upon them that I shall primarily focus, first by means of a
discussion of some relevant critical approaches, and then through a
close analysis of the exemplary novel El celoso extremeño.
E. C. Riley established a fundamental dichotomy within the critical
typology of Cervantes’s fiction. In a seminal essay, ‘Cervantes: A
Question of Genre’, Riley identifies a sustained interaction between two
basic genres of prose narrative, romance and novel. The former is a
traditional generic mode which differs from the latter in fundamental
respects, among the most important of which are: a romance is a story
of love and/or adventure in which idealized protagonists face a series
of travails frequently involving long journeys, quests, and shipwrecks;
the characters are psychologically flattened and the moral dilemmas
that they face are simplified; supernatural elements are prevalent,
while space and time are not subject to the constraints of physical
reality; the resolution of the plot, which takes precedence over
character development and in which virtue usually triumphs, is based
on coincidence (peripeteia and anagnorisis) rather than causality. These
characteristics (sans the overtly supernatural) are identifiable in the
canon from Toledo’s discourse on the ideal prose narrative, with its
tragic turns and happy outcomes, shipwrecks and storms, and stock
character types (beautiful damsel, heroic knight, brash barbarian).
Some critics have argued that Cervantes evolved either away from or
toward the romance genre over the course of his life, but such
assertions are now generally agreed to be untenable. Rather, as Riley
points out, the romance–novel polarity is a schematic simplification; in
practice Cervantes combined elements of each genre throughout his
career.7
Riley’s thesis is now widely accepted, although it has been subject to
some critique. Javier Blasco argues that it is an historical anachronism
to oppose the traditional romance to the modern novel, which only
came into existence in the nineteenth century.8 Conscious of the
incapacity of romance to deal with the problems of real life, Cervantes
brought it into dialogue with the Italian novella, which did not focus
on the wanderings of stylized character types but, rather, on the
quotidian details of everyday lives. Thus, Cervantes reacted, not against
the romance as literary genre, but against its stilted vision of reality,
and his literary achievement is therefore as much epistemological as
aesthetic. Cervantes appropriates and bequeaths to literary posterity
the previously unexplored space between history (‘what is’) and poetry
(‘what should be’); the fundamental binary within his fiction, according
to Blasco, is not romance–novel but literature–life.9
Antony Close provides a further historical revision of the romance–
novel dialectic. Rather than set the romance in opposition to the novel,
he analyses Cervantes’s fiction as the interplay of romance and comedy.
Perhaps more than any other critic, Close insists on Cervantes’s basic
fidelity to the traditional division of styles (high, medium, and low)
and the classical (i.e. Aristotelian and Horatian) precepts of literature.
Cervantes was not interested in realism for its own sake, Close argues;
rather, he remained faithful to comedy’s conventional ‘low’ rhetorical
style and focus on everyday subjects and themes, albeit largely stripped
of its traditional coarseness and social indecorousness. Close
controversially maintains that Don Quixote was in conception
essentially a work of comedy, a stand that some critics have decried as
hermeneutically constraining.10 Close asserts that Don Quixote ‘is a
comic novel fundamentally conceived from the perspective of
romance’, and this interweaving of narrative modes produces the
progressive breakdown of generic segmentation in the work.11
Cervantes’s tendency to ‘intermesh’ romance and comedy leads to the
‘revolutionary synthesis of the plane of low comedy with more serious
matters in Don Quixote, Part II’.12 The specific structural mechanism by
means of which Cervantes achieves this radical advance in narrative
technique is the integration of traditional digressive episodes into the
main plot. Rather than treating such digressions conventionally, as
merely ornamental distractions or sententious meditations, Don
Quixote, Part II contains a ‘sweeping mosaic of contemporary life’ that
synthesizes novelistic and documentary elements, moral satire, ethics,
politics, and religion.13
In this view, the romance genre forms the core of all of Cervantes’s
prose works, and this observation allows Close to define Cervantes’s
poetics of comedy, which receives practically no explicit theoretical
treatment in Cervantes’s oeuvre, in terms of his aesthetics of romance.
Close argues that Cervantes’s conception of verisimilitude bears little
relation to nineteenth-century standards of mimetic realism, but is
instead symmetrical to his theory of the prose epic, which is predicated
upon astonishment and wonder, but not outright fantasy. In other
words, ‘monstrous aberration’ in Cervantes’s comedy mirrors ‘heroic or
romantic prodigy’ in his romance fiction.14 This approach runs counter
to much Cervantes criticism, which has often been preoccupied with
explaining the originality of Don Quixote in opposition to the canon
from Toledo’s aesthetic principles, rather than in consonance with
them.15
That said, the discursive capaciousness that Close identifies in Don
Quixote, Part II cannot only be the product of the romance-comedy
dialectic, or of Cervantes’s revolutionary structural innovations,
because it is present, in some degree, in all of his prose fiction. It
appears to be basic to Cervantes’s conception of romance, as Blasco
observes.16 This is evident in the canon from Toledo’s previously cited
remarks about the thematic variety available to the writer of chivalric
fiction. Modern Cervantes criticism frequently links discursive
polyphony in Don Quixote with the theory of literary heteroglossia
developed by M. M. Bakhtin. According to Bakhtin, ‘the novel can be
defined as a diversity of social speech types (sometimes even diversity
of languages) and a diversity of individual voices, artistically
organized’.17 Unlike primitive narrative forms (e.g. epic and romance),
the novel is never univocal but is instead composed of a multiplicity of
languages drawn from the spectrum of social registers and dialects and
dialogically harmonized. ‘Authorial speech, the speeches of narrators,
inserted genres, the speech of characters are merely those fundamental
compositional unities with whose help heteroglossia [raznorečie] can
enter the novel; each of them permits a multiplicity of social voices and
a wide variety of their links and interrelationships (always more or less
dialogized)’.18
Bakhtinian discourse analysis has been widely applied to Cervantes,
and it is one of the few literary theories that has found widespread
favour amongst both Anglo-American and Spanish critics. One result of
this critical approach is the challenging of all authorities and the
relativizing of all truth. As Carroll Johnson puts it, Don Quixote ‘sows
disorder’ by undermining any relation between reality, language, and
individual consciousness.19 Or, according to Blasco, ‘Cervantes, through
his protagonist’s madness, demonstrates that in a story, be it historical
or fictional, truth is a pure construct of discourse’.20 Some critics
maintain that these claims are overwrought. Stanislav Zimic observes:
‘Since Romanticism, it has often been maintained that one of the
principal themes of Don Quixote is the impossibility of distinguishing
reality from its appearances, truth from fiction. It is obvious…that Don
Quixote and some other characters personify such an impossibility, but
with what legitimate literary criterion can one conclude that Cervantes
is suggesting with it a philosophical axiom, applicable universally to
all?’21 Indeed, Quixote’s perception is aberrant, and the text never
privileges it above the common perspective of the other characters.22
Despite this important caveat, however, it would be exaggerated to
delegitimize (rather than attenuate) the relativistic readings of other
critics. Close acknowledges Cervantes’s ‘radical refusal of omniscience’;
a certain level of ambiguity is clearly endemic in his fiction and must
simply be taken as a given.23 Cervantes himself makes this point
explicit in the prologue to Don Quixote, Part I, in which he exempts his
reader from ‘todo respecto y obligación, y, así, puedes decir de la
historia todo aquello que te pareciere, sin temor que te calunien por el
mal ni te premien por el bien que dijeres della’ [‘every respect and
obligation, and so you can say whatever you like about this history,
without any fear of being attacked for a hostile judgement or rewarded
for a favourable one’].24 Such ambivalence is consonant with
Cervantes’s engagement with romance. The canon from Toledo
condemns the comedia nueva (new comedy), a genre which is here
presented as symmetrical to prose romance, as ‘conocidos disparates’
[‘so much stuff and nonsense’] while hailing Cervantes’s own early play
La Numancia, amongst others, as a model of popular theatre that
conforms to the classical precepts of art.25 The priest takes up the
theme and disparages the modern theatre for being, not an ‘espejo de la
vida humana’ [‘mirror of human life’] as Cicero prescribed, but ‘espejos
de disparates’ [‘mirrors of absurdity’], because there can be nothing
more absurd than disregarding the unity of time or representing ‘un
viejo valiente y un mozo cobarde, un lacayo rectórico, un paje
consejero, un rey ganapán y una princesa fregona’ [‘an old man who’s
courageous and a young one who’s a coward, a lackey who’s a great
orator, a page who’s a counsellor, a king who’s a porter and a princess
who’s a cleaning-woman’].26
As with the canon’s dismissal of the chivalric romances for their
violations of the traditional rules of art, the priest decries the comedia’s
violations of the classical unities of time and place and unrealistic
character portrayals. Note, however, that what he presents as
Ciceronian truth-to-life is actually truth-to-literary-type. Surely valiant
old men and cowardly youths exist in ‘human life’, although such
characterizations were anathema to sixteenth-century neo-Aristotelian
poetics. In practice, Cervantes was willing to violate these precepts, to
some degree, when he deemed it appropriate to do so. Indeed, the most
salient characteristic of the young nobleman Cardenio in Don Quixote,
Part I is his cowardice.27 He is precisely the kind of ‘mozo cobarde’ that
the priest rejects as an aesthetic absurdity. There is further evidence of
this tension in the ostensible ‘absurdity’ of portraying ‘una princesa
fregona’, a princess who’s a cleaning-woman, as the priest has it.
Roughly a decade later, Cervantes wrote an exemplary novel titled La
ilustre fregona, which introduces the character of Costanza, not a
princess but still yet the daughter of aristocrats, who grows up in an
inn and comes to be known as ‘la ilustre fregona’.28 An even more
striking example is found in Cervantes’s play El rufián dichoso, in which
the titular character has a religious conversion, changes his name from
Lugo to Cristóbal de la Cruz, and abandons the criminal underworld of
Seville for a beatific life in Mexico. At the beginning of Act Two there is
an interlude of some 100 verses in which the metaphorical figures of
Curiosidad [Curiosity] and Comedia [Theatre] discuss the play’s
apparent violations of the unities of time, place, and person. Comedia
explains that ‘Ya represento mil cosas,/no en relación, como de antes,/
sino en hecho; y así, es fuerza/que haya de mudar lugares;/que, como
acontecen ellas/en muy diferentes partes,/voime allí donde acontecen,/
disculpa del disparate’ [‘I now represent a thousand things,/not as
figures, like before,/but as facts; and thus, it is necessary/that I change
location;/since those things occur/in very different places,/I go where
they happen/which excuses the absurdity’].29 Here, Cervantes explicitly
retracts the wholesale denunciation of precisely the same ‘disparate’
that both the canon and priest condemn in Don Quixote. While
Florencio Sevilla Arroyo and Antonio Rey Hazas convincingly argue
that this passage does not constitute a recantation of formal principles,
Cervantes’s willingness to adapt his poetics to the exigencies of genre
(in the case of El rufián dichoso, the comedia de santos or saint’s play)
bespeaks an aesthetic flexibility that partially belies the conventional
exposition of artistic standards.30 As Williamson observes, ‘Cervantes’s
attitude to romance is complex…Like most writers of his time,
Cervantes starts from within a particular genre…but in his desire to
delight his readers while at the same time reflecting plausible
experience, he is prepared to follow his creative instincts or yield to the
pressures of context, even to the point of straining genre beyond
established practice’.31 Both the canon and priest allow for the
perfectibility of the prose romance and the popular theatre (once again,
understood as aesthetically symmetrical genres), and so the basic
duality that Riley identified (and Blanco and Close, amongst others,
modified) of romance and novel that traverses all of Cervantes’s work is
contained in the dialogue between the two characters.
If Cervantes’s unceasing literary experimentation produces such
‘paradoxical hybrids’, as Close terms the exemplary novels La gitanilla
and El celoso extremeño, perhaps that is because romance cannot be
fully harmonized with any other literary genre.32 The texts that result
from such aesthetic collisions will inevitably contain loose ends, jagged
edges, and thematic fissures. ‘[A]lgún misterio tienen escondido que las
levanta’ [‘They have some hidden mystery that elevates them’]
Cervantes enigmatically assures us in the prologue to his Novelas
ejemplares.33 El celoso extremeño is a case in point. Constructed as a
collage of competing generic tropes taken from the Bible, mythology,
romance, folktale, comedy, and tragedy interwoven with numerous
non-literary discourses, the story is infused with indeterminacies of
theme and character that defy conventional categorization and
straightforward interpretation.34 In the novella, Cervantes uses
discursive multiplicity and generic hybridity to imbue a traditional tale
of an ironically cuckolded jealous husband with moral ambiguity and
psychological complexity.
El celoso extremeño is the story of Carrizales, a hidalgo, or gentleman,
from Extremadura who spends the first forty years of his life
squandering his inheritance before moving to Peru, where he amasses a
fortune in ways that are ethically problematic. Upon returning to Spain
twenty years later, he settles in Seville and marries Leonora, a girl of
thirteen, whom he locks up in a large house described as both convent
and castle and from which he banishes all other males, including cats
and dogs. Not even the tapestries contain male figures, such is the
extreme nature of Carrizales’s obsessive jealously. Loaysa, a local
youth, determines to break into the house and seduce Leonora. He
partially succeeds, but, although tempted, Leonora refuses to
consummate the adulterous romance. Carrizales, who has been
administered a sleeping unguent, awakes unexpectedly and discovers
the apparent lovers in a compromising position, but a heart attack
prevents him from carrying through his plan to kill them both. He
sanctimoniously pardons Leonora before he dies, but she refuses to
marry her seducer and instead enters the most cloistered convent in the
city.
The figure of the jealous husband who becomes a cuckold, and
particularly the jealous old husband who marries a young girl, is a
standard type in European folklore and the Italian novella.35 Cervantes
exploits this stock figure to great comic effect in his entremés El viejo
celoso, but in El celoso extremeño he suffuses the conventional character
with moral resonance derived from contemporary economic discourse
related to commercial ethics. I have studied this aspect of the novella in
detail elsewhere, and here I will focus on the intertwining of love,
religion, marriage, and literature in the scenes of the attempted
seduction of Leonora and the story’s denouement.36 When Loaysa first
penetrates the outer defences of the house (the stable and the area
above it where a black slave named Luis sleeps), he speaks to the
women (Leonora, her duenna, and maids) through the inner door of the
house and offers to provide some powder [‘polvos’] that will make
Carrizales sleep. The device of a magical sleeping potion is common in
romance narratives, but Cervantes customarily attenuates this
fantastical aspect of the plot by explaining that a physician will provide
the soporific unguent that is eventually applied to Carrizales. The
response of one of the maids to the young man’s proposal introduces
into the story the discourses of courtly love and Catholic theology that
will prove to be of great thematic importance. She exclaims that, if the
potion works, ‘¡qué buena ventura se nos habría entrado por las
puertas, sin sentillo y sin merecello!’ [‘what good fortune would have
walked through the door, without us feeling or deserving it!’]. The
powder would be ‘polvos de vida para todas nosotras’ [‘powder of life
for all of us’], and she enthusiastically offers to mix it with wine and be
her master’s cup bearer: ‘y pluguiese a Dios que durmiese el viejo tres
días con sus noches, que otros tantos tendríamos nosotras de gloria’
[‘and may it please God that the old man sleep three days and nights,
for they would be days of glory for us’].37
The maid’s reference to the good fortune to be had ‘without us
feeling or deserving it’ and the life-giving properties of the soporific
recalls the Pauline doctrine of the divine gift of salvific grace
(Ephesians 2:8), while the ‘three days and nights’ that will lead the
women to ‘glory’ clearly references Christ’s sacrificial death and
resurrection. The cluster of Christological images also includes the wine
with which the powder is to be mixed, which evokes the blood of
Christ as represented in the Eucharist. Given that what is in play is the
seduction of a married woman, the scene becomes a burlesque travesty
of the sacraments of Holy Communion and marriage in which the
sleeping Carrizales is the missing element of the dyad, the
(metaphorical) body of Christ and the (real) body of the husband, and
will be replaced in the marriage bed by the young seducer.38 The
conjunction of theology and adulterous love derives from the tradition
of courtly love and was prevalent in fifteenth-century Spanish
cancioneros [songbooks]. There is an explicit reference to the courtly
tradition in the ‘glory’ that the maid hopes to attain from Loaysa,
because the term gloria in cancionero poetry was often the equivalent of
joi in Provençal verse, i.e. sexual consummation.39
The confluence of literary and theological discourses, which here
propitiates a parody of the religio amoris of the courtly tradition, recurs
in Loaysa’s burlesque oath to respect the authority of the women in the
house. He swears ‘por la intemerata eficacia, donde más santa y
largamente se contiene, y por las entradas y salidas del santo Líbano
monte, y por todo aquello que en su proemio encierra la verdadera
historia de Carlomagno, con la muerte del gigante Fierabrás’ [‘by the
immaculate grace, where it is more saintly and fully contained, and by
the entrances and exits from holy Mount Lebanon, and by all that is
related in the prologue of the true history of Charlemagne, with the
death of the giant Fierabrás’].40 The reference to the ‘true history of
Charlemagne’ is to the Historia del Emperador Carlo Magno y de los Doce
pares de Francia by Nicolao de Piamonte, a very popular libro de cordel
[chapbook] that Marcel Bataillon describes as ‘archivulgaire’.41 The
comic effect of swearing on such a book is obvious, but the preceding
references are more suggestive. The ‘intemerata eficacia’ (‘immaculate
grace’) is a reference to the Virgin; the phrase would have been familiar
to Cervantes’s contemporaries from the frequently reprinted Horae
intemeratae Virginis Mariae.42 Holy Mount Lebanon also refers to the
Mother of God, as becomes clear from a reference in Juan de Mena’s
Laberinto de Fortuna: ‘el Líbano monte do nace el Jordano / do fué
bateado el Fi de María’ [‘the Lebanese mount where the Jordan is born
/ where the Son of Maria was forged’].43 The phrases ‘donde más santa
y largamente se contiene’ and ‘por las entradas y salidas’ are taken
from notarial language. The inclusion of the adjective ‘santa’ is
obviously burlesque, but it acquires an especially piquant signification
in view of the possible sexual meaning of ‘entradas y salidas’
[‘entrances and exits’].
In Persiles y Sigismunda the Spaniard Antonio is shipwrecked on the
Barbarous Isle, where he meets a young woman named Ricla. Ricla
recounts how she visited Antonio frequently in the cave where he was
hiding, and the result of her many ‘entradas y salidas’ was the birth of
the couple’s two children.44 The comical connection between
mountains and childbirth was established in the classical tradition, for
example in Horace’s Ars Poetica: ‘parturient montes, nascetur ridiculus
mus’ [‘Mountains will labour, to birth will come a laughter-rousing
mouse!’].45 This association remained commonplace in Golden Age
Spain, as indicated by Cristóbal Pérez de Hererra’s Enigmas of 1618:
‘Dezimos que los montes están preñados, por los grandes tumores y
hinchaçones que tienen. Nunca paren, aunque dixo metaforicamente vn
poeta, Parturient montes, nascetur ridiculus mus, que estarán de parto los
montes, y nascerà un pequeño rato[n]’ [‘We say that the mountains are
pregnant, because of the large lumps and swellings that they have.
They never give birth, although a poet said, metaphorically, Parturient
montes, nascetur riduculus mus: the mountains will be in labour and a
small mouse will be born’].46 Even more farcically, in the seventeenth-
century the word ‘montaña’ was a slang term for ‘mancebía’
[brothel].47 Therefore, Loaysa’s solemn oath is an outrageous travesty,
a burlesque collage that comically reduces to the same plane of
nonsense the Immaculate Conception, the Virgin Birth, legal
terminology, and unsophisticated popular literature (the obviously false
‘true history’ of Charlemagne).
The themes or virginity, childbirth, religion, and sex refer directly to
the situation within the house: it is ostensibly full of virgin women,
although there is the suggestion that this is true only of Leonora due to
Carrizales’s impotence, which is doubly ironic considering that his
primary motivation for marrying was to have children to whom to
bequeath his fortune. Moreover, it harks back to the maid’s speech
analysed above, in which the absent sacramental body (Christ/
Carrizles) is to be replaced by the virile young male, who will then
deliver the sexual satisfaction (and fertility?) that the husband has been
unable to provide. The text develops this theme further via the
reference to Loaysa as a ‘virote’, a word that meant the bolt fired by a
crossbow but also, in germanía [ruffians’ slang], ‘penis’.48 Moreover, the
seducer gains entry to the house by means of Carrizales’s master key,
an object whose obviously phallic connotations are only bolstered by
the fact that Leonora takes it from its hiding place under the mattress
of the marriage bed, just beneath the midpoint of her husband’s body.49
Furthermore, the element of sacramental travesty is reinforced by the
fact that Leonora is able to take the key because Carrizales has been
anointed with the quasi-magical soporific, ‘lo mismo que haberle
embalsamado para la sepultura’ [‘as if he had been embalmed for the
tomb’], in a parody of the sacrament of last rites.50 Finally, before
being admitted into the house, Loaysa demonstrates his (false) good
faith by making the sign of the cross with two fingers and kissing it
three times.51
El celoso extremeño thus articulates a complex palimpsest in which
the discourses of love, religion, and sex converge in a brilliant parody
of courtly poetry and a biting satire of unequal marriages (high rates of
mortality in childbirth meant that unions between older men and very
young women were common in the period), played out in a burlesque
parody of Christian sacraments and Christological imagery. These
thematic strands continue until the end of the novella, although they
diverge somewhat into primarily comic and morally serious registers.
The former is represented by the women’s first full look at Loaysa once
he enters the house, dressed in his finest clothes. One admires his
‘copete…tan lindo y tan rizado’ [‘such a beautiful, curly quiff’], while
another praises his teeth, which are as white as ‘piñones mondados’
[‘peeled pine nuts’]. A third describes his beautiful ‘ojos tan grandes y
tan rasgados’ [‘large and almond-shaped eyes’] which are so green that
‘no parecen sino que son de esmeraldas’ [‘they look like emeralds’].52
This is a parody of the Petrarchan tropes of the traditional descriptio
puellae of Renaissance poetry. Instead of long, golden locks, Loaysa has
curly hair, which was not associated with beauty in the period; in place
of teeth as white as pearls, his are like peeled pine nuts; and his large,
almond-shaped eyes, as green as emeralds, recall those of Melibea in
Fernando de Rojas’s La Celestina, itself a parody of the excesses of
courtly love.53
Cervantes takes a serious approach to these poetic commonplaces
elsewhere, in his descriptions of Preciosa in La gitanilla and Costanza in
La ilustre fregona, and of Isabela in La española inglesa and Auristela in
Persiles y Sigismunda as rendered ugly by (the romance devices of)
poison and witchcraft. In El celoso extremeño, however, Cervantes
effects a particularly complex double inversion by transposing the
parody to a male eroticized by the female gaze, which heightens the
comic incongruity of the scene at the same time that it reflects on the
low-class status of the women who surround Leonora, as well as
creating empathy for the very same group of (mostly young) females
who have been virtually imprisoned and unnaturally denied any outlet
for their legitimate sexual feelings.
The religious discourse reappears in a morally and psychologically
serious register in the repeated references to Carrizales as the ‘velado’
[‘veiled one’] of Leonora. The term ‘velado’ comes from the bride’s veil
in the ‘velambres’ or wedding ceremony, and so the description of
Carrizales as the ‘velado’ refers directly to the sacrament of Christian
marriage.54 This is doubly significant, firstly because it redeems the
sacramental travesty played out in the parody of courtly poetry, and
secondly because it adds psychological complexity to Leonora’s
characterization. Trapped between two perversions of Christian
marriage, that of a loveless union in which she was essentially
purchased from her parents in order to breed heirs for her husband,
and the temptations of a young seducer who intends only to abuse her
innocence and beauty, Leonora acquires increased interiority as an
independent and morally autonomous character because of her
constant weighing of the temptation of physical satisfaction with
Loaysa against her obligation to respect her marriage vows. Her
decision to enter a convent after Carrizales’s death is an appropriate
response to the internal turmoil that has roiled her during Loaysa’s
attempted seduction, as well as the inversion of the sacramental
travesty of marriage analysed above: Leonora definitively reiterates her
choice not to replace the absent body of her husband with the physical
body of another, opting instead to become a bride of Christ. Far from
the unsatisfied wife who schemes for sexual satisfaction of folktales and
the Italian novella, Leonora emerges as a character imbued with a mind
and soul who expresses internal psychic, emotional, and spiritual
conflict.55
The same is true of her husband, who experiences moral and
spiritual crises both before setting sail for Peru and upon his return to
Seville. The most subtle and ambiguous revelation of the character’s
psychology, however, comes at the end of El celoso extremeño, through
the fusion of Carrizales’s point of view with that of the previously
omniscient and objective narrator. This confluence of perspectives is
not clearly signalled in the text, which continues to be narrated in an
apparently unchanged third-person omniscient voice. Nevertheless,
there are multiple clues that indicate that, in fact, the novella’s ending,
up until its enigmatic final paragraph, is actually presented from
Carrizales’s point of view in an indirect style. This narrative shift occurs
at precisely the moment when Carrizales awakes and discovers Leonora
and Loaysa asleep in each other’s arms. The narrator has been
unequivocal in stating directly that Leonora did not give in to her
seducer’s entreaties, and that her refusal to do so was the direct result
of her own will. Now, however, the narration, which has not obviously
switched to Carrizales’s perspective, speaks of the righteous vengeance
that such a ‘grande maldad’ [‘great evil’] requires, and that the
wronged husband makes a ‘determinación honrosa y necesaria’ [‘honest
and necessary determination’] to cleanse his stained honour.56 This is
both factually untrue within the story as well as incommensurate with
the presentation of bloody vengeance elsewhere in Cervantes’s work,
which otherwise invariably condemns violent reprisal and shows the
tragic consequences that flow from it.
Such examples of Carrizales’s own point of view presented as if they
were the narrator’s objective, third-person perspective proliferate.
When Leonora discovers her husband after his infarction, she naturally
shows concern, but Carrizales, described (inaccurately) as a
‘desdichado viejo’ [‘unfortunate old man’], reacts to her as ‘la dulce
enemiga suya’ [‘his sweet enemy’]. The language of the woman as
‘sweet enemy’ (because beloved but disdainful) comes directly from
courtly love, which functions here, not as a sacramental travesty, but as
a parody of the extreme male narcissism typical of Provençal and
cancionero poetry. Leonora continues to tend to her husband ‘como si
fuera la cosa del mundo que más amaba’ [‘as if he were the thing she
most loved in the world’], while he alternately laughs ‘con una risa de
persona que estaba fuera de sí, considerando la falsedad de sus
lágrimas’ [‘with the laugh of a crazy person, considering the falseness
of her tears’] and cries ‘por ver cuán fingidamente ella las derramaba’
[‘from seeing how falsely she shed them’].57 In view of Leonora’s
resistance to the (very real) attractions of Loaysa, it is entirely plausible
that Carrizales is indeed the thing that she most loves (even if that love
is undeserved, and primarily the product of her age and inexperience),
while her tears are unquestionably the result of genuine emotional
turmoil. This is categorically not a neutral presentation of the state of
Leonora’s mind and soul, but a tendentious, self-flattering, and self-
exculpatory interpretation of her actions on the part of her husband.
The third-person indirect style of narration, however, imbricates the
omniscient perspective of the narrator and the biased point of view of
the character. Because the text does not explicitly signal this radical
narrative shift, the reader is lulled into accepting Carrizales’s solipsistic
perspective as objectively factual.
Edwin Williamson has noted a similar technique at work in Don
Quijote, in which the narrative style anticipates the style indirect libre as
the narrator appropriates, manipulates, and ironizes the characters’
discourses in order to reveal hidden aspects of their own consciousness,
while problematizing issues of poetic truth and the author’s
responsibility in selecting and ordering the content of his fiction.58 I
propose 
that 
in 
El 
celoso 
extremeño, 
this 
clearly 
deliberate
destabilisation of narrative authority represents Cervantes’s reaction to
the picaresque novel, particularly to his literary rival Mateo Alemán’s
enormously popular Guzmán de Alfarache. Guzmán narrates his own life
story of increasing delinquency and debauchery, interspersed with
sententiously moralising digressions, from his perspective as a reformed
sinner who has undergone a complete spiritual conversion. It is a
critical axiom that Cervantes never accepted the monadic narrative
viewpoint of the picaresque, preferring instead to divide the unitary
perspective amongst two characters, as in the exemplary novels La
ilustre fregona, Rinconete y Cortadillo, and El coloquio de los perros.59 In
his study of the exemplary novel El licenciado Vidriera as Cervantes’s
rewriting of the picaresque novel, E. Michael Gerli observes a fusion of
the points of view of the titular protagonist and the tale’s omniscient
narrator in order to lend credibility to the madness-induced social
satire of a marginalised character.60 In El celoso extremeño, in contrast,
Cervantes 
combines 
first-person 
subjectivity 
with 
third-person
objectivity to produce the opposite effect, a disconcerting composite of
competing claims to authority and the resultant loss of the narrator’s
impartiality. In concert with Carrizales’s sanctimonious pardoning of
Leonora, this technique challenges the possibility of first-person
narrative objectivity. It further suggests that picaresque narratives are
equally subjective, and, if only by implication, that Guzmán’s moral
conversion is as suspect as that of Carrizales.
The novella’s final paragraph confirms the narrator’s loss of
autonomy. There is an abrupt change to a first-person style reminiscent
of picaresque texts, ‘Y yo quedé con el deseo de llegar al fin deste
suceso’ [‘And I was left with the desire to come to the end of this
story’], followed by a trite moral about the uselessness of locks and
other safeguards in containing the free will of inexperienced youths
worthy of Carrizales himself.61 In fact, as if in final confirmation of
narrative fusion, this statement essentially repeats the old man’s own
(self-justifying) explanation to Leonora of how he came to be
‘defrauded’ in his marital hopes: ‘no te culpo, digo, porque persuasiones
de viejas taimadas y requiebros de mozos enamorados fácilmente
vencen y triunfan del poco ingenio que los pocos años encierran’ [‘I do
not blame you, I repeat, because the persuasions of crafty old women
and the wooing by young men in love easily defeat and overcome the
scant intelligence of the young].62 Most puzzling, however, is the final
sentence. Suddenly, the previously omniscient narrator is unaware of
why Leonora did not make more of an effort to convince her dying
husband that she had not been unfaithful to him. The narrator’s
explanation, that her own distress and Carrizales’s quick death made it
impossible, is completely unsatisfactory in view of the fact that the old
man does not die for seven days after his initial shock, nor is there any
suggestion that he remains unconscious for most or all of that time. The
more plausible explanation, I would suggest, is that the old man’s death
constricts the narrator’s perspective, as part of a purposeful subversion
of the legitimacy of first-person picaresque narratives.
There is evidence for this reading elsewhere in Cervantes’s work. In
Don Quixote, Part I, the Don frees a group of criminals condemned as
galley slaves (precisely like Guzmán de Alfarache). One of them, Ginés
de Pasamonte, has written his own life story, which he confidently
proclaims to be superior to Lazarillo de Tormes and all other books of its
ilk (i.e. picaresque stories). Don Quixote enquires if Ginés has finished
his life’s work: ‘—¿Cómo puede estar acabado—respondió él—, si aún
no está acabada mi vida?’ [‘“How can I have finished it,” he replied, “if
my life hasn’t finished yet?”’].63 The answer is illuminating. It suggests
that picaresque narratives are inevitably incomplete, as are the lives of
their (diegetic) author-narrators. In El celoso extremeño, however,
Cervantes parodies the picaresque form both by inverting the normal
life pattern of the protagonist (Carrizales’s story focuses on his old age
and death rather than his birth and growth to adulthood) and by
contriving to have the character die at the end, thus bringing the tale to
the definitive conclusion that traditional picaresque narratives
necessarily lack. The death of the character obviously forecloses the
possibility of further expressing his perspective, but because his point
of view has become entwined with that of the narrator, stripping it of
its objectivity and authority, there is nothing left for the narrator to do
but to speculate feebly on Leonora’s motives and the ultimate meaning
of the text. This final, fundamental indeterminacy functions to expose
the radical subjectivity of first-person picaresque texts and, therefore,
to undermine their pretence of narrative authority. Just like the
befuddled narrator at the end of El celoso extremeño, the pícaro cannot
be trusted to accurately judge and recount his own life; ultimate
interpretative authority resides with the reader, just as we have seen
Cervantes proclaim in the prologue to Don Quixote, Part I.
Johnson points out that, for Bakhtin, the free indirect style of
narration is a fundamental aspect of the novel because it fuses two
different intersubjective discourses (that of the narrator and another
character).64 The critic argues that this fusion leads to the breakdown
of all textual authority. While acknowledging the ineluctable ambiguity
of the technique, I nevertheless view it as motivated more by aesthetic
than epistemological concerns. If Cervantes were truly interested in
fatally undermining all authorities, it seems unlikely that he would go
to such lengths to create the appearance of objectivity in his other
picaresque-inflected works (especially the three Novelas ejemplares
listed above). For Cervantes, multiple observers and common
perspectives appear to be, if not guarantees, reliable simulacra of
objectivity within literary representation. El celoso extremeño, therefore,
exposes the inadequacy of the particular kind of unmediated, first-
person narration popularised by the picaresque novel, not the
impossibility of all authoritative discourse. It represents an audacious
response to a contemporary literary genre, rather than a philosophical
meditation on the nature of reality. This profound aesthetic
engagement is typical of Cervantes’s fiction, as is the inclusion of an
abundance of heterogeneous literary and non-literary discourses and
the novella’s radical shifts in tone, which modulates between the
extremes of comic farce and tragedy. El celoso extremeño is indeed a
‘paradoxical hybrid’, to return to Close’s definition, and one that aptly
demonstrates, on a small scale, the inveterate experimentation and
inherent challenge to strict literary categorization that characterizes all
of Cervantes’s writing.
Works Cited
Alcalá Galán, Mercedes. Escritura desatada: poéticas de la representación en
Cervantes (Alcalá de Henares: Centro de Estudios Cervantinos, 2009).
Armstrong-Roche, Michael. Cervantes’s Epic Novel: Empire, Religion, and the
Dream Life of Heroes in ‘Persiles’ (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2009).
Bakhtin, M. M. The Dialogic Imagination, edited by Michael Holquist, translated
by Caryl Emerson and Holquist (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1981; repr.
2004).
Bataillon, Marcel. ‘Glanes Cervantines’. Quaderni Ibero-Americani 2, no. 15
(1954): pp. 393–7.
Blasco, Javier. Cervantes, raro inventor (Alcalá de Henares: Centro de Estudios
Cervantinos, 2005).
Blasco, Javier. ‘La compartida responsabilidad de la “escritura desatada” del
Quijote’. Criticón 46 (1989): pp. 41–62.
Boyd, Stephen. ‘A Tale of Two Serpents: Biblical and Mythological Allusions in
Cervantes’s El celoso extremeño’. In Rewriting Classical Mythology in the Hispanic
Baroque, edited by Isabel Torres (Woodbridge: Tamesis, 2007): pp. 71–89.
Brewer, Brian. ‘Jealousy and Usury in El celoso extremeño’. Cervantes: Bulletin of
the Cervantes Society of America 33, no. 1 (2013): pp. 11–43.
Castro, Américo. ‘Cervantes se nos desliza en El celoso extremeño’. In Obra
reunida volumen dos, edited by José Miranda (Madrid: Trotta, 2002), pp. 321–
30.
Cervantes, Miguel de. Don Quijote de la Mancha, edited by Francisco Rico and
others (Barcelona: Galaxia Gutenberg, 2004).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Don Quixote, translated by John Rutherford (London:
Penguin, 2000; repr. 2003).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda, edited by Juan
Bautista Avalle-Arce (Madrid: Castalia, 1969; repr. 1992).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Novelas ejemplares, vol. 1, edited by Harry Sieber (Madrid:
Cátedra, 2002).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Novelas ejemplares, vol. 2, edited by Harry Sieber (Madrid:
Cátedra, 2003).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Teatro completo, edited by Florencio Sevilla Arroyo and
Antonio Rey Hazas (Barcelona: Planeta, 2003; Altaya, 2005).
Close, Anthony. Cervantes and the Comic Mind of His Age (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2000; repr. 2002).
Covarrubias Orozco, Sebastián de. Tesoro de la lengua castellana o española,
edited by Felipe C. R. Maldonado, revised by Manuel Camarero (Madrid:
Castalia, 1995).
El Saffar, Ruth. Novel to Romance: A Study of Cervantes’s ‘Novelas ejemplares’
(Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1974).
Forcione, Alban K. Cervantes and the Humanist Vision: A Study of Four ‘Exemplary
Novels’ (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1982).
Forcione, Alban K. Cervantes, Aristotle, and the ‘Persiles’ (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1970).
Forcione, Alban K. ‘Cervantes en busca de una pastoral auténtica’. Nueva Revista
de Filología Hispánica 36, no. 2 (1988): pp. 1011–43.
Gasta, Chad M. ‘The Picaresque According to Cervantes’. Philological Quarterly
89, no.1 (2010): pp. 31–53.
Gerli, E. Michael. Refiguring Authority: Reading, Writing, and Rewriting in
Cervantes (Lexington: The University Press of Kentucky, 1995).
González Echevarría, Roberto. Cervantes’s ‘Don Quixote’ (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 2015).
Hernández Alonso, César, and Beatriz Sanz Alonso. Diccionario de germanía
(Madrid: Gredos, 2002).
Horace. Satires, Epistles and ‘Ars Poetica’, edited and translated by H. Rushton
Fairclough (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London:
William Heinemann, 1970).
Johnson, Carroll B. ‘Cómo se lee hoy el Quijote’. In Cervantes, edited by Anthony
Close (Madrid: Centro de Estudios Cervantinos, 1995), pp. 335–48.
Lazarillo de Tormes, edited by Francisco Rico (Madrid: Cátedra, 2008).
Lewis-Smith, Paul. ‘Realism, Idealism, and the Transformation of Romance in
“La ilustre fregona’”. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 30,
no. 1 (2010): pp. 17–31.
Pérez de Herrera, Cristóbal. Proverbios morales y consejos christianos, mvy
provechosos para concierto y espejo de la vida, adornados de lugares y textos de
las diuinas y humanas letras. Y enigmas filosóficas, naturales y morales, con sus
comentos, vol. 2, (Madrid: Luis Sánchez, 1618).
Redondo, Augustín. ‘De don Clavijo a Clavileño: Algunos aspectos de la
tradición carnavalesca y cazurra en el Quijote (II, 38–41)’. Edad de Oro 3
(1984): pp. 181–99.
Rico, Francisco. ‘Polvos y pajas’. In Prosa y poesía: Homenaje a Gonzalo Sobejano,
edited by Christopher Mauer and others (Madrid: Gredos, 2001), pp. 311–22.
Riley, E.C. ‘Cervantes: A Question of Genre’. In Medieval and Renaissance Studies
on Spain and Portugal in Honour of P.E. Russell, edited by F.W. Hodcroft and
others (Oxford: The Society for the Study of Mediaeval Languages and
Literature, 1981), pp. 69–85.
Riley, E.C. Cervantes’s Theory of the Novel (Oxford: Clarendon, 1962).
Rojas, Fernando de. La Celestina, edited by Dorothy S. Severin (Madrid: Cátedra,
2002).
Severin, Dorothy Sherman. ‘La parodia del amor cortés en La Celestina’. Edad de
Oro 3 (1984): pp. 275–9.
Sevilla Arroyo, Florencio, and Antonio Rey Hazas. ‘Introducción’. In Teatro
completo by Miguel de Cervantes, edited by Sevilla Arroyo and Rey Hazas
(Madrid: Planeta, 2003; Altaya, 2005), pp. xi–lxxiii.
Spitzer, Leo. ‘Y así juro por la intemerata eficacia…’. Quaderni Ibero-Americani
2, no. 16 (1954): pp. 483–4.
Urbina, Eduardo. Principios y fines del ‘Quijote’ (Potomac, Maryland: Scripta
Humanistica, 1990).
Williamson, Edwin. ‘Challenging the Hierarchies: The Interplay of Romance and
the Picaresque in La ilustre fregona’. Bulletin of Spanish Studies 81, nos. 4–5
(2004): pp. 655–74.
Williamson, Edwin. ‘Romance and Realism in the Interpolated Stories of the
Quixote’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 2, no. 1 (1982):
pp. 43–67.
Williamson, Edwin. The Half-Way House of Fiction: ‘Don Quixote’ and Arthurian
Romance (Oxford: Clarendon, 1984).
Whinnom, Keith. ‘Towards the Interpretation and Appreciation of the
Cancioneros of the Cancionero general of 1511’. In Medieval and Renaissance
Spanish Literatures: Selected Essays, edited by Alan Deyermond and others
(Exeter: University of Exeter Press, 1994), pp. 114–32.
Zimic, Stanislav. ‘Don Quixote: Some Observations on the Creation and
Evolution of Its Protagonist and on Its Novelistic Structures’. Bulletin of
Spanish Studies 88, no. 1 (2011): pp. 25–43.
1 For E.C. Riley, ‘[t]his well-known passage is central to Cervantes’s theory
of the novel. It is the most compact and concrete expression of his views on
what such a novel ought to be and, more especially, ought to contain’
(Cervantes’s Theory…, p. 49). Anthony Close concurs: ‘I take it, as others have
done, that [the canon] speaks for Cervantes here’ (p. 110). Javier Blasco, in
contrast, warns against taking these statements at face value. He accuses Riley
of failing to distinguish between Cervantes’s own literary opinions and those of
his characters, and thus of conflating ‘Cervantes’s theory of the novel’ with
‘Cervantes’s theory of a novel’ (‘La compartida responsabilidad…’, pp. 47–8;
original emphasis). Independently of whether such a modern separation of
voices is easily applicable to an early modern text, it is worth noting that Riley
himself was perfectly aware of this distinction: ‘What we have here is not so
much a theory of The Novel as a theory of a certain type of novel—a type,
however, which specially appealed to Cervantes’ (Cervantes’s Theory…, p. 49).
2 Cervantes, Don Quijote…, pp. 601–2.
3 Cervantes, Don Quixote, p. 441.
4 Forcione, Cervantes, Aristotle…, p. 169.
5 Forcione, ‘Cervantes en busca…’, pp. 1011–14.
6 On the former aspect, see Forcione, Cervantes, Aristotle…; on the latter, see
Armstrong-Roche.
7 Edwin Williamson argues that in Don Quixote Cervantes subjects the
degraded, late medieval chivalric romances to ironic parody, from within which
he effects a radical shift in focus toward the interior lives of the characters
(Williamson, The Half-Way House…; ‘Romance and Realism…’).
8 This is also why Williamson terms Don Quixote a ‘half-way house’ of fiction
between the medieval romance and the modern novel (Williamson, The Half-
Way House…, p. ix).
9 Blasco, Cervantes, raro inventor, pp. 16–17.
10 Roberto González Echevarría undoubtedly reflects widespread critical
opinion when he writes: ‘They say that in the beginning the Quixote was read
almost universally as a funny book. This is obviously a misreading; it is much
more than just a funny book’ (p. 11).
11 Close, p. 139.
12 Close, pp. 128–9.
13 Close, pp. 149–50.
14 Close, p. 161.
15 Riley, for example, contends that the canon from Toledo’s declaration of
aesthetic principles ‘accounts well enough for the Persiles, but only very
partially for the Quixote…It does nothing to explain the complex creative
processes of Don Quixote’ (Cervantes’s Theory…, p. 49). Eduardo Urbina argues
that Don Quixote, Part II creates a new kind of fiction based on ambivalent
admiratio (wonderment and laughter) that supersedes the canon’s categorical
norms (Urbina, p. 105). Mercedes Alcalá Galán remarks on the disappointment
that such a ‘new and radical’ work as Don Quixote is not supported by a literary
theory that explains it or deviates from the critical commonplaces of its time (p.
168).
16 Blasco, Cervantes, raro inventor, p. 112.
17 Bakhtin, p. 262.
18 Bakhtin, p. 263.
19 Johnson, p. 345.
20 Blasco, Cervantes, raro inventor, p. 26.
21 Zimic, pp. 26–7.
22 The lone exception is perhaps the Cave of Montesinos episode in Don
Quixote, Part II, but is any critic willing to posit that Quixote’s vision in that
instance is any more ‘real’ than his seeing giants in place of windmills?
23 Close, p. 68.
24 Cervantes, Don Quijote…, p. 10; p. 12.
25 Cervantes, Don Quijote…, p. 604; p. 443.
26 Cervantes, Don Quijote…, pp. 605–6; p. 444.
27 See Cardenio’s own description of his cowardice in not asking his father
for permission to marry his beloved Luscinda, and his subsequent failure to
prevent her from marrying Don Fernando in Don Quixote I.27.
28 On the interplay of romance and realism in La ilustre fregona, see
Williamson, ‘Challenging…’ and Lewis-Smith, ‘Realism, Idealism…’.
29 Cervantes, Teatro completo, p. 326, vv. 1245–52.
30 Sevilla Arroyo and Rey Hazas, pp. XLII–XLIV.
31 Williamson, ‘Romance…’, p. 67.
32 Close, p. 120.
33 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, vol. 1, p. 53. All quotations from the Novelas
ejemplares have been translated by the author of this chapter.
34 On the Biblical and mythological references in El celoso extremeño, see
Boyd.
35 ‘Of all the tales in the collection [of Novelas ejemplares] none is more
directly indebted in form and content to the central tradition of the European
short story, which found its classical expression in the Decameron, and none
reveals more clearly Cervantes’s mastery of the narrative techniques which
Boccaccio perfected and left as the classical standard for future short story
writers’ (Forcione, Cervantes and…, p. 31).
36 See Brewer.
37 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, vol. 2, p. 116.
38 Within this specific context of corporeal substitution, might a
contemporary reader have discerned an oblique reference to the doctrine of
transubstantiation?
39 Whinnom, pp. 123–8. Note, however, that in the period the word ‘polvo’
did not have its modern sexual connotation. See also Rico.
40 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, vol. 2, p. 124.
41 Bataillon, p. 395.
42 Spitzer, p. 484; Bataillon, p. 396.
43 Bataillon, p. 395.
44 Cervantes, Los trabajos…, p. 82. Compare, as well, the Archpriest of San
Salvador’s reassurance to Lázaro de Tormes that the latter’s wife, in reality the
former’s mistress, ‘enters’ and ‘exits’ his home without dishonouring her
husband: ‘Lázaro de Tormes, quien ha de mirar a dichos de malas lenguas nunca
medrará; digo esto porque no me maravillaría alguno, viendo entrar en mi casa
a tu mujer y salir della. Ella entra muy a tu honra y suya’ [‘Lázaro de Tormes,
he who credits the lies told by evil tongues will never amount to anything; I say
this because such a falsehood would not surprise me at all, in view of your
wife’s comings and goings from my house. Her entrances are very honourable
both for you and for her’] (Lazarillo de Tormes, pp. 132–3; the translation is by
the author of this chapter).
45 Horace, pp. 462–3.
46 Pérez de Herrera, vol. 2, p. 128v.
47 Redondo, p. 195.
48 Hernández Alonso and Sanz Alonso, p. 494.
49 In the period, the key was a common phallic symbol, while doors, locks,
and associated imagery corresponded to female genitalia. Such images figure
prominently throughout El celoso extremeño. See Redondo, p. 194.
50 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, vol. 2, p. 121.
51 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, vol. 2, p. 119.
52 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, vol. 2, p. 125.
53 Rojas, p. 101. See also Severin.
54 Covarrubias Orozco, p. 955; [s.v. velo]. The description of the sleeping
Carrizales as a ‘velado’ is also an ironic play on the meaning of the verb ‘velar’,
‘to stay awake’ and ‘to keep watch over’.
55 Unlike Castro, I perceive no subversive malice in Leonora’s thinking of
Carrizales as her ‘velado’ (p. 324). Moreover, attributing Loaysa’s sexual failure
to his own ‘premature agedness’ instead of to Leonora’s strength of will strips
the latter of her agency and flattens the complexity of her character (p. 328). I
concur with Forcione that ‘Leonora displays courage and struggles against the
force that has appeared overwhelming and that has attracted her so
powerfully…[Loaysa’s] ignominy only throws into sharper light the true victory
and the authentic heroism of the maiden’ (Cervantes and…, pp. 71–2).
56 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, vol. 2, p. 130.
57 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, vol. 2, pp. 131–2.
58 Williamson, The Half-Way House…, pp. 147–9.
59 For an overview of the topic and critical survey, see Gasta.
60 Gerli, pp. 20–1. Ruth El Saffar likewise notes the fusion of protagonist and
narrator in El licenciado Vidriera, which she identifies with Cervantes’s own lack
of critical distance from the character (pp. 50–61).
61 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, vol. 2, p. 135.
62 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, vol. 2, p. 133.
63 Cervantes, Don Quijote, p. 266; p. 182.
64 Johnson, p. 343.
Section 4
Cervantes The Dramatist
Chapter 15
First Writings for the Stage (1580s)
Pre-Lopean Successes and Failures
David G. Burton
Ohio University
After having spent five years as a captive in Algiers, Cervantes was at
last ransomed, returning to his native Spain in the autumn of 1580. All
of his attempts at securing a soldier’s pension or a position of any kind
in the court were unsuccessful. Jean Canavaggio writes that ‘failing to
obtain the post that he coveted, the author of Galatea then sees himself
obliged to try the impossible: to live by his pen, however modestly’.1
Cervantes then turned to writing for the stage, a genre that had long
held great appeal to him.
A popular entertainment in Spain since the early years of the
sixteenth century, by the 1570s plays presented by professional acting
troops in permanent buildings called corrales [theatres] rapidly became
an obsession with the Spanish theatre-going public, especially in the
larger urban centres like Madrid, Seville, and Valencia. The advent of
the plays by Lope de Vega in the late 1580s would take that obsession
to a national level.
Fate has not been kind to the manuscript versions of plays from
those early years, extending even well into the seventeenth century.
Very often these texts did not survive because, in order to have the play
performed, it would be sold to an autor de comedias, the head of an
acting troop, who then performed the play, surely with omissions and/
or emendations he considered necessary for the artistic and economic
success of a production. Since their prime interest was to earn a living
and make a name for themselves, few dramatists made the effort to
have their works published. Should a patron like a particular play or
group of plays, he or she would hire someone to make a copy for their
personal library. Such copies over time might or might not survive
fires, wars, and other calamities that could ravage homes. At least one
exception to the fate of dramatic texts is that of the Sevillian Juan de la
Cueva (1545–1610). In 1583, and again in 1588, Cueva ensured that
his fourteen plays, produced and performed in the public theatres of
Seville between 1579 and 1581, appeared in print. Such was not the
case for Cervantes’s early plays.
Critics tell us that Cervantes’s first plays were written at some time
after his return to Spain from captivity in Algiers in 1580 until about
1586. Dates and titles are, at best, surmises, since no text has been
found that names Cervantes as author. Stefano Arata, in 1997, found, in
the Biblioteca Nacional de España in Madrid, copies of actor’s parts for
La Jerusalén and Los tratos de Argel that indicate rehearsals for these
two comedias in 1586. Cervantes does not provide much help. By his
own account, in the prologue to the Ocho comedias y ocho entremeses
(1615), Cervantes claims to have penned some twenty or thirty plays
during the years spanning 1581–6, and that his plays enjoyed some
success. In that prologue he writes:
compuse en ese tiempo hasta veinte comedias o treinta, que todas ellas
se recitaron sin que se les ofreciese ofrenda de pepinos ni de otra cosa
arrojadiza; corrieron su carrera sin silbos, gritas ni barahundas. Tuve
otras cosas en que ocuparme; dejé la pluma y las comedias, y entró
luego el monstruo de naturaleza el gran Lope de Vega, y alzóse con la
monarquía cómica.2
[I wrote at that time some twenty or thirty plays, for all of them were
performed without being offered cucumbers or any other thing that
could be thrown onto the stage; they ran their course without whistles,
booing or uproars. I had other things to do; I left behind my pen and
plays, and that was when the great Lope de Vega, the monster of
nature, came on the scene.]3
The previous year, in the ‘Adjunta al Parnaso’ Cervantes named some of
those early plays that he considered worthy: Los tratos de Argel, La
Numancia, La gran turquesca, La batalla naval, La Jerusalén, La Amaranta
o La del Mayo, El bosque amoroso, La única o La bizarra Arsinda. Of
these, only Los tratos de Argel—also known by the singular form El trato
de Argel—and El cerco de Numancia—better known as La Numancia—
have survived and have enjoyed a history of print. Antonio de Sancha
first published them in 1784 along with the Viaje del Parnaso. In
addition, we might add the anonymous play La conquista de Jerusalén,
thanks to the efforts of a handful of critics who, beginning in 1992 with
the work of the Italian Hispanist Stefano Arata, consider it written by
Cervantes.
Los tratos de Argel/El trato de Argel
Critics tell us that the earliest of Cervantes’s plays is Los tratos de Argel.
The date of composition is left to speculation. Since Cervantes himself
names it first among his early plays, Los tratos continues to be accorded
the position of the first composed. Geoffrey Stagg believes Cervantes
wrote it sometime around 1577, while he was still a captive in Algiers.
Others, following the lead of Jean Canavaggio in 1977, say that
Cervantes penned it after his return to Spain during the period 1581–3.
In the play, our writer’s time spent as a captive in Algiers becomes a
motif that will reoccur throughout his literary creations.4
Briefly, the plot of Los tratos centres on the plight of Aurelio, a
Spanish captive and slave in the home of Yzuf and his wife Zahara. We
find that Zahara harbours a desire to make Aurelio her lover, while
Yzuf has the same feelings toward another Spanish captive, Silvia.
Unbeknownst to either the husband or the wife, Silvia is Aurelio’s
beloved. Scattered among these tensions, a parade of characters pass
through, giving the audience glimpses into the horrific lives that
Christian captives had to endure. Among these characters are instances
of men who, in failed attempts to escape, narrate the cruel punishment
that awaits them when they are inevitably caught; of a Christian family
where the sons are taken from their parents to be sold as slaves or as
objects of sexual desire to Muslim masters; of apostates who convert to
Islam in order to gain an easier life; of the torture and murder of a
captive Catholic priest as retribution for the death of a morisco (a
Spanish Muslim convert to Christianity) in Spain at the hands of the
Inquisition; of the fortunate captives who await rescue and ransom by
the Trinitarian and Mercedarian friars. At the conclusion of the play, a
glimmer of hope shines as the King of Algiers allows Aurelio and Silvia
to return to Spain on the condition that they send their ransom
payment to him.
Currently, one can easily find four editions of Los tratos. The play is
in Volume 5 of the comedies and interludes that Rodolfo Schevill and
Adolfo Bonilla published between 1915 and 1922. Florencio Sevilla
Arroyo and Antonio Rey Hazas published it twice: once as part of
Cervantes’s complete theatrical works for Planeta in 1987, and again as
Volume 3 of Cervantes’s complete works for the Centro de Estudios
Cervantinos in 1995. Kathleen Thornton Spinnenweber prepared an
edition, aimed principally for an undergraduate audience in the US, for
Cervantes & Co. in 2011. Each of these editions contains notes that
clarify and complement the text.
The body of textual criticism treating Los tratos is not extensive.
When considered as a whole, three topics stand out as points of critical
interest. Most of the studies prior to 2002 deal with two of those
themes: the play as important to understanding Cervantes’s biography
and the metric structure of the play. To be sure, the difficult lives of
captives in Algiers exerted an enormous influence on Cervantes. His
keen observation of life and customs in a society so very different from
his own gave the Spaniard another perspective that surely challenged
his own views. After the 2002 publication of María Antonia Garcés’s
Cervantes in Algiers, criticism tends to examine the play considering the
challenges to Cervantes as a captive. These challenges lead to the ideas
of perspectivism and ambiguity that become landmarks of Cervantine
style.
Schevill and Bonilla, writing in 1922 in their introduction to the
comedies and interludes, devote a little more than six pages to a
discussion of the play. They focus on form, commenting on the
importance of the play as a part of Cervantes’s biography, on what they
regard as a plot of unconnected episodes, on language and phrases
similar to that found in some of the plays of Juan de la Cueva, and on
the versification. J.P. Wickersham Crawford writes: ‘The construction is
loose and, as a play, it cannot be accorded high rank’. He does state,
however, that because it portrays experiences lived by Cervantes and
points out the harsh conditions of Christian captives, ‘it deserves our
respect and admiration’.5
Joaquín Casalduero (1974) gives Los tratos a Christian reading,
believing that this play works out the process of salvation. It is not a
series of unrelated episodes but rather a conscious effort to show the
reward for remaining a steadfast Christian, given the cruelties, the
separations, and the hardships that a captive in an Islamic culture must
face. Geoffrey Stagg (1953) makes the claim that Cervantes wrote Los
tratos during his captivity in Algiers. He writes that references in the
text to specific events in the summer of 1577 and in the spring of 1580
provide the evidence that Cervantes wrote the play in 1577 and made
revisions to it in 1580. The critic also bases his belief in a composition
date of 1577 on two points of form that occur in other dramatic works
in the 1570s and 1580s: the experimenting with various verse forms
and combinations and the tendency in those years to reduce the
number of acts from five to four.
Jean Canavaggio’s study of Cervantes’s theatre (1977) repeatedly
cites textual evidence that shows Cervantes to be an independent
creator, not a slavish follower of a specific style or dramatist. In his
biography of our author, the French critic sees Los tratos as a picture of
history as well as the ‘first significant break between the illusions of the
hero of Lepanto and Algiers and the disappointments of the captive
returned to his native land’.6
E.C. Riley’s article on figuras morales [allegorical figures] (1971) sees
the interaction of Aurelio and the figures of Ocasión [Opportunity] and
Necesidad [Need] in Los tratos as a spiritual conflict within Aurelio that
underlines Christian fortitude as the primary theme in the play. Edward
Friedman finds that parallel episodes form a conceptual unity in
Cervantes’s plays. Friedman believes that captivity and love give that
unity to Los tratos.
Stanislav Zimic (1992) sees Los tratos as a description of Hell similar
to Dante’s in the Divine Comedy. The episodes give the appearance of
real life, not fiction. Zimic writes that the love between Aurelio and
Silvia ‘simboliza la firmeza de la fe y del amor verdadero, que hace
sobrellevar los peores tormentos y sacrificios del cautiverio y ofrece la
única posibilidad de salvación’.7 [‘simbolizes the strength of faith and
true love, which makes it possible to endure the worst torments and
sacrifices of captivity and offers the only possibility of salvation’].
Sevilla Arroyo and Rey Hazas see the comedia as a true
representation of the physical and mental suffering of captives.
Furthermore, they view the play as a call to Philip II to pay attention to
the cruelties that captives were suffering and to send immediate relief.8
Stephen Rupp focuses on the year 1541 as a key moment in Spain’s
history. At that time Charles V sent an ill-fated expedition to Algiers to
fight against Algerian piracy. In Los tratos the Christian captives live
each day with the hope that Philip II, remembering their plight, will
send a Spanish fleet to free them. Unfortunately, the army that was
being built up in Extremadura was meant to invade Portugal, not to
ransom the Spanish captives in Algiers.
María Antonia Garcés takes criticism of Los tratos to a new level. As
a former prisoner of war herself, Garcés draws on the trauma she
experienced in her native Colombia to give meaning to her reading of
Los tratos and the ‘Captive’s Tale’ in the first part of Don Quixote. She
believes that in the writing of Los tratos, Cervantes was giving vent to
those atrocities that he suffered during his five-year captivity in Algiers;
atrocities that only one who has suffered them can understand. She
writes: ‘If El trato de Argel [sic] testifies to the impossibility of bearing
witness to trauma, it also enacts the liberation of the testimony through
the medium of drama and poetry’.9 This book is indispensable reading
for an understanding of this play in light of the trauma experienced by
captives in any age. Her Spanish edition (2005) updates some of her
thoughts on trauma. Of interest here is her explanation of how
Cervantes began to use the apellido [surname] Saavedra as part of his
family name after his return from captivity. It would appear that no
previous cervantista has explored this phenomenon.
Moisés Castillo writes about the ambiguities that occur in Los tratos
when talking about what he calls ‘los ideales fatuos’ [fatuous ideals]—
honour, purity of blood, orthodox religion, especially when they
happen in ‘zonas de contraste cultural’ [areas of cultural contrast].10
The critic says that in creating a theatre of ideas Cervantes wants his
readers to think for themselves by seeing these values from the
perspectives of both Christians and Muslims. Tolerance results when
one begins to understand that values, in whatever form, are shared
with the Other.
Julia Domínguez’s article on psychodrama in Los tratos fits nicely
into a group of studies that explore the deeper meanings of the play.
Domínguez employs the idea of psychodrama to show that Cervantes’s
characters recall moments or experiences that he lived during captivity.
For Domínguez, captivity gave Cervantes an opportunity to learn about
and to explore deeply a culture so very different from his own. The
proof arises in the view of Algiers through different perspectives
presented by the characters in the play. They appear as pairs, almost
binary opposites, who reconstruct the past, but from different
perspectives. By way of example, Saavedra, the orthodox Christian
captive, appears opposite Pedro, an apostate, who has chosen Islam so
as to enjoy an easier life in Algiers; the morisco in Valencia who is
‘relaxed’ by the Inquisition in an auto da fe and the priest in Algiers
who is brutally killed in retribution.
Natalio Ohanna writes that Los tratos presents a complex
representation of the realities that captives faced in Algiers. In much
the same thread as the Domínguez article, Ohanna discusses the idea of
perspective as it applies to religion, Catholic Christian as well as Islam.
By drawing parallels between Spain and Algiers, Cervantes creates a
diversity of points of view that open the door to doubt when it comes
to questions of societal ideas. Sebastián, in Act I, talks about the cruelty
of his captors in Algiers as he narrates the death of a morisco in
Valencia at the hands of the Inquisition. He insists that the Holy Office
and its Inquisitors have carried out justice even as he names a similar
and equally horrible death of a captive priest in Algiers as extreme
cruelty. At the end of the play, when the King of Algiers allows Aurelio
and Silvia to return to Spain and freedom, Cervantes calls his audience
to reflect that a member of a stereotyped, cruel society is also capable
of mercy.
In the same vein, Moisés Castillo studies La Jerusalén in view of
other of Cervantes’s captive plays, among them Los tratos. Castillo sees
parallels among these plays for the way that Cervantes allows Christian
and Muslim values to intertwine. This intermingling of cultural points
of view creates ambiguities that momentarily suspend ‘actitudes
dogmáticos’ [dogmatic attitudes].11
Charles Patterson discusses the Potiphar’s Wife motif in the play. He
writes that details in the relationship Aurelio-Zahara come not from the
Judeo-Christian tale of Joseph as found in Genesis 39, but from morisco
versions of the Joseph material that had circulated in Spain since the
Middle Ages. By including details that come from a non-Christian
tradition, Patterson sees that Cervantes subverts his text by creating yet
another level of ambiguity. This ambiguity points to the complex vision
of religious and ethnic differences that Cervantes observed during his
captivity.
La Numancia
Of the two plays—or three if one considers La Jerusalén to be authored
by Cervantes—that survive from the 1580s following Cervantes’s return
from captivity, La Numancia is the one that students of Spanish
literature know best. It is also the one that has received the most
critical attention. Few, if any, critics seem to have dealt with the issue
of its date of composition; it evidently being enough that Cervantes
situates it in that early period and that he mentions it by name three
different times: in Don Quixote, in the ‘Adjunta al Parnaso’, and in the
prologue to the Ocho comedias y ocho entremeses. As with Los tratos, it
survives in two manuscripts: the one in the Hispanic Society of America
that contains both plays, and in a separate manuscript in the Spanish
National Library.
Briefly, the plot centres on the last days of a sixteen-year siege that
the Roman army has placed on the Celtiberian town Numancia in the
second century bc. The Roman Senate has sent Escipión, its most able
general, to restore discipline to the army, to end the siege, and thus
gain control at last over the unruly province. When the citizens of
Numancia try to sue for a peaceful truce, Escipión will have none of it.
The remainder of the play works out the result of the siege and the
Numantians’ refusal to surrender to the occupying force only to be
treated as slaves. All signs point to the inexorable, tragic end of the city
and its inhabitants brought about by the siege and starvation.
The love interest between Marandro and Lira gives a human side to
the Celtiberians whose women, mothers, and children must suffer
extreme hunger and even death, for the sake of remaining free. Rather
than surrender to the Romans, to a person, the citizens choose
communal suicide. In the final scenes, when the Romans climb the
walls only to observe the mass destruction of the city, the sole survivor,
a young boy named Bariato, tells Escipión and the army that the city
preferred death to slavery. The boy then jumps to his death thus
depriving the Roman general a true victory. Allegorical figures, a
common Cervantine device in these early plays, appear at the end of
Act I, in Act IV, and at the end of the play. These figures speak to the
future glory of Spain as well as to the valour and courage of the
Numantians, who are seen as the ancestors of the Spaniards of
Cervantes’s epoch.
Editions of La Numancia continue to appear, the latest coming out as
an e-book in 2014. Antonio de Sancha was the first to publish
Numancia and Los tratos as part of an edition that included the Viaje del
Parnaso in 1784. Curiously enough in this digital age, in a recent online
search, Sancha’s edition as well as an edition prepared from what
appears to be the manuscript in the Biblioteca Nacional are available as
e-books. Schevill and Bonilla included it in their six-volume set of the
comedias. Undergraduate and graduate students studying Spanish
literature in the United States have read it in the edition made by
Martel and Alpern for their Diez Comedias del Siglo de Oro [Ten Plays of
the Golden Age]. Sevilla Arroyo and Rey Hazas include it in their Teatro
de Cervantes [Cervantes’s Plays] (1985) and in their three-volume Obras
completas de Cervantes [Complete Works of Cervantes] (1995). Among the
numerous separate editions that one can find in libraries and on-line
are those by Ricardo Doménech (1967), Alfredo Heremegildo (1994),
Robert Marrast (1995), Alison Caplan and Bryan Betancur (2010),
Alfredo Baras Escolá (2009 hardback and also as an e-book), and
Gastón Gilabert (2014 e-book).
When one takes into account the criticism that has been written
about La Numancia, that work falls into three discernible areas, where
the mid area marks a clear division between the first and third. Aaron
M. Kahn’s The Ambivalence of Imperial Discourse (2008) is clearly the
work ab quo where one must begin. This critic consulted almost all of
the articles and books that touch on all aspects of this Cervantine
comedia. The few that, for whatever reason, do not appear in Kahn’s
bibliography make up that body of criticism that will be considered
here in chronological order as prior to the publication of his
monograph in 2008. Those articles that also came out in 2008 or which
followed the publication of Kahn’s book will be considered as post-
Kahn.
Kahn studies Numancia from the point of view that ‘no clear message
can be discerned from simply reading the text’.12 Kahn goes on to
clarify that ‘by making use of ambiguous ideas, words, and dramatic
devices he [Cervantes] encourages us…to investigate beyond the literal
dialogue’. This critic sees in Numancia a message about the
‘consequences of unjust imperial expansion’.13 In his first chapter, Kahn
studies Spanish dramatists of the period 1580–90 who morally opposed
Philip II’s move to annex the throne of Portugal to his ever-expanding
empire. In many of the plays by such dramatists as Jerónimo
Bermúdez, Juan de la Cueva, Cristobal de Virués, Gabriel Lobo Lasso de
la Vega, and Lupercio Leonardo de Argensola, all contemporaries of
Cervantes, one can read a subtle message directed to the monarch
about the dangers of exceeding his power. Kahn places Cervantes
clearly among those dramatists who veil their political stance in plays
that are historical in nature.
In Chapters Two and Three, Kahn investigates the theme of
ambiguity in the play—is it blatantly patriotic or does it criticize
conquest and imperialism?—and ambiguity in the ability to place
Numancia into a dramatic category—is it a tragedy or is it that
admixture of both comedy and tragedy. Chapters Four, Five, and Six
continue to explore the idea of ambiguity but now in Cervantes’s
manipulation of historical characters that appear in Numancia and who
participated in Spain’s own history. Throughout his analysis of
Numancia Kahn draws on the vast bibliography to bolster his argument.
In addition, he summarizes those ideas so that the reader has a clear
sense of the criticism that has chiefly been written since the beginning
of the Twentieth Century.
One finds, however, that some essays did not find their way into
Kahn’s book. Karl-Ludwig Selig writes about the ‘river speech’ spoken
by the Duero River in Act I. In the prophecy of a bright future for
Spain, Selig finds references to Garcilaso de la Vega—the Tagus River,
the Duke of Alba, Mars and Venus (war and love)—that evoke a
Renaissance model and ideal. Selig writes that the Duero speech not
only looks forward to the Fama speech at the end of the play, but
‘establishes also a thematic link to Marandro, who is the individual and
poetic reductio of the Numantians as the heroic collective’.14
Stanislav Zimic’s article ‘Visión política y moral de Cervantes en
Numancia’ is an important essay to accompany Kahn’s reading of this
play as an ambiguous work. Zimic believes that Cervantes subtly
criticizes the relationship between Spain and the Vatican in the
sixteenth century. Zimic sees a conflict between good and evil, where
Numancia represents Spain and good, while Escipión stands for the
corrupt, Machiavellian Roman Curia and evil. Gwynne Edwards sees
that Numancia is organized around a sense of tragedy in its structure
that develops and intensifies as the play moves to its conclusion.
Adrienne S. Mandel, writing in 1981, believes that what Cervantes
presents in Numancia is ‘una visión fundamental existencialista’ [‘a
fundamentally existential vision’].15 She finds that the Numantians find
the meaning of their existence precisely in their solidarity to die for
their cause. When the young boy Bariato jumps to his death, he has
secured not only his existential freedom but that of all the Numantians.
Jane Tar, writing in 2004, discusses the Aristotelian idea of
hamartia, an error in judgment. She sees this idea as not a moral
shortcoming, but rather as ‘the complicity of practical lived experience
and the mutability of the human situation’.16 Furthermore, the critic
views this error as a double hamartia occurring both with the
Numantian governing body and with Escipión. Essentially she claims
that both sides have erred by being too slow to react: the Numantians
for waiting too long to sue for peace (Act I) and for choosing to settle
the siege with a one-on-one duel that seems ridiculous to the Romans
and their code of honour (Act III), and Escipión for waiting too long to
show clemency to Numancia, namely when he offers mercy to the boy
Bariato in an effort to show himself victorious to the Roman people
(Act IV).
Antonia Petro, in 2005, discusses sacrifices in Numancia. For this
critic, the theme of sacrifice is present throughout the play and
functions as ‘el eje principal sobre el que gira toda la obra’ [‘the
principal idea of the work’].17 According to Petro, sacrifice should
restore harmony to a community or the death of one should save the
whole, but this does not happen in Numancia. Time and again the
sacrifices made by the Numantians result in failure. Only when Bariato
jumps from his tower at the end of the play does a sacrifice benefit
everyone. ‘Este ejemplo animará…al resto de pueblos [sic] españoles a
luchar por su identidad y libertad en los tiempos venideros. Numancia
se sacrifica…para beneficio de la totalidad del pueblo español que
representa’ [‘This example will move, in the future…all the other
Spanish peoples to fight for their identity and liberty. Numancia
sacrifices itself…for the benefit of the entire Spanish people that it
represents’].18
Following the publication of Kahn’s book in 2008, we have a body
of essays that continue to explore the meaning of Numancia and its
place in Cervantes’s literary production. Michael Armstrong-Roche, in
2008, argues that the patriotism that many believe to be the core of
Numancia is ambiguous at best. If this play asks its Spanish audience
‘Who are we?’, the answer is far from simple. Spain as patria
[fatherland] is the result of positive and negative traits portrayed both
in the Numantians and in the Romans. In terms of ethnicity, religion,
law, and language, if the Numantians are the ancestors of sixteenth-
century Spain, then, writes Armstrong-Roche, ‘we are courageous, but
primitive, cannibalistic, and homicidal. If Roman, then we are prudent,
accomplished and Lords of the World but also proud, tyrannical, and
doomed to be trampled underfoot by once and future Numancias’.19
Martha García writes about order and disorder in Numancia using
Aristotelian terms with respect to tragedy. She equates disorder with
the unjust war waged upon Numancia by the Romans. The Numantians
have not committed any act that must be punished. Their only ‘sin’, as
it were, is the desire to remain free and independent. For that reason,
the war is an unjust aggression toward them. Thus, at the close of the
play, when all the Numantians have committed their collective act of
suicide precisely to remain free and independent, order, i.e. justice, is
restored.
Margarita Peña, also writing in 2008, speaks to Numancia in terms of
Cervantes’s biography. She considers the play to have been written
c.1584–5, with the six allegorical figures (Spain, Duero, Hunger,
Sickness, War, and Fame) being expressions of the personal tragedies
Cervantes experienced in captivity and in the years following his return
to Spain in 1580.
Elena García-Martín studies, in 2009, ceremonial drama as
represented by Cervantes’s Numancia and the two Numancia plays
written by Rojas Zorrilla in the 1640s. She sees Cervantes’s play as
portraying the national myth of Numancia as a ceremonial drama that
praises the nation, while the two plays by Rojas Zorrilla work to
destroy that same myth.
Rachel Burk examines blood imagery in her provocative study of
Numancia. She suggests that Cervantes undermines the idea that
heredity, i.e. blood as lineage, links Numantians and Spaniards. Rather,
it is through self-sacrifice represented by the Eucharist that Spaniards
can trace their heritage to the Numantians. For Burk, being Christian
and Spaniard does not rely on biological and ethnic heritage, but rather
depends on the repeated participation in the Eucharist, the rite of self-
sacrifice instituted by Christ.
Carlos Moreno Hernández takes the reference to ‘el jirón lusitano’
[the Portuguese pennant]20 (l. 517) in the Duero River’s prophecy as
his point of departure. This critic insists that twenty-first century
terminology for nations must not be employed when discussing a work
written in the sixteenth century. He maintains that until the nineteenth
century, the word España referred to the totality of the Iberian
Peninsula: Aragon, Castile, and Portugal. Castilla, he affirms, is the term
that should be used to differentiate between the three kingdoms. He
harshly criticizes several academics (principally non-Spanish ones) for
their failure to make the distinction between Spain and Castile,
especially when discussing Philip II’s annexing Portugal to the crown of
Castile in the 1580s.
Jorge Checa (2013) examines the speech made by the allegorical
figure of War (Act IV), the character of Escipión, and the idea of
harmony disrupted within the Numantians through a philosophical
lens. Checa sees that an apparent optimism in War’s speech questions
the stability of the Spanish Empire where the alto [powerful] and
pequeño [weak] will exchange places. He studies the character of
Escipión using subjective reason for his analysis. The general sees that
only he is right and reduces his opponents to mere beasts. Within
Numancia the situation seems harmonious with the exchanges of
friendship and loyalty between Marandro and Leonicio, and the love
between Marandro and Lira. When the sacrifice of Marquino fails,
followed by the necromancer’s own death, along with the call by
Teógenes for collective suicide, that harmony is shown to be precarious
at best in what Checa calls ‘the negative sublime’. Even at the end of
the play, when Fame predicts a brighter future for Spain, the audience
has its own doubts after having witnessed the on-stage loss of friends,
family, and loved ones.
E. C. Graf (2013) explores similarities present in El Greco’s Alegoría
de la Liga Santa [Allegory of the Holy Alliance], San Juan’s Cantico
espiritual [Spiritual Song], and Cervantes’s Numancia. A diabolical
presence intrudes into each of the works to lend a moral perspective to
each. In the El Greco painting it is the gaping mouth of Hell behind the
figure of Philip II. In San Juan’s poem it is the mention of the name
Aminadad in a final stanza. In his own commentary on the poem, San
Juan equates that name with the Devil. In Numancia it is the devil who
comes from beneath the stage to snatch the sacrificial ram away from
the Numantian priests (Act II). For Graf, in each of these works, the
artist/writers have placed Philip II ‘at a precarious point in their cosmic
moral trajectories’ that makes each of these works a political one as
well.21 He further states that:
in my opinion they are sufficiently skeptical of Philip II’s moral status
so as to anticipate, to varying the degrees, the role played by the
diabolical in more modern political discourse. In my view, each in its
own way anticipates a certain 1799 political cartoon of Napoleon
leading his troops into a giant hellmouth.22
Matthew Wyszynski (2014) discusses civic oratory in Numancia. He
carefully studies and juxtaposes two examples of deliberative rhetoric
in the play. In Escipión’s harangue to his troops in Act I, Wyszynski
shows that while the Roman general follows the rules of speaking, his
later actions, i.e., refusing to dialogue with the Numantians, undercut
the effectiveness of his call to action. The second example comes from
Act III, when the Numantian women effectively convince their fellow
citizens that collective suicide is the only way to preserve the city’s
liberty. Here, words and deeds work in harmony to bring about an
effective action. At the end of his essay, Wyszynski considers why
women had no voice in civic oratory. His answer seems to be that by
placing speech-making that produces effective results in the voices of a
marginalized part of society, Cervantes advocates the same for his own
society. ‘Top-down’ policies have led only to disaster; the ‘bottom-top’
deserves to have its voice heard.
La conquista de Jerusalén por Godofre de
Bullón
This anonymous comedia survives in two manuscript forms. A complete
version of the play in three acts resides in the Biblioteca de Palacio de
Madrid, and the other is a collection of individual actors’ parts [papeles
de actor] kept in the Biblioteca Nacional, also in Madrid. These sheets,
used by the actors to rehearse their lines, comprise nearly 900 lines of
material.
The play takes place during the First Crusade (eleventh century)
without and within the walls of Jerusalem. The complicated plot is
based on Torquato Tasso’s 1581 poem La Gerusalemme liberata
[Jerusalem Delivered]. The Christian forces led by Godofre de Bullón
(Godfrey of Bouillon) lay siege to the city. Aladino, the Muslim ruler of
Jerusalem, sends his trusted Amazonesque warrior Clorinda to Godofre
asking for a truce, a tactic meant to delay while the besieged await the
arrival of forces sent by the Sultan of Egypt. When Clorinda arrives
with her compatriot Agrante, the Christian leader Tancredo
immediately falls in love with her.
Erminia, daughter of the Muslim King of Antioch, had been taken
prisoner by Tancredo after the Christian army had captured that city
before moving on to Jerusalem. She fell in love with her captor, who,
because of their difference of religion, has distanced himself and freed
her. Because she is a friend of Clorinda with whom she shares
chambers, Erminia decides to dress in Clorinda’s armour so that she can
go unnoticed to the Christian camp in order to see Tancredo.
Clorinda and a messenger from the Sultan of Egypt ask Godofre to
retreat from Jerusalem, but he refuses. Erminia, in Clorinda’s armour,
asks to see Tancredo. Thinking she is Clorinda, Tancredo goes to meet
her and confesses his love for her. Erminia discloses herself and then
returns to Jerusalem.
In Jerusalem, a eunuch tells Clorinda that he brought her to
Jerusalem. The Christian Queen of Ethiopia gave birth to a white
daughter, Clorinda, whom she exchanged for a black baby. The queen
then made the eunuch promise that he would ensure that Clorinda
become a Christian. Now Clorinda says that she will destroy the
Christian war machines. In the Christian camp, Tancredo does not
recognize Clorinda, they fight, and he kills her. Just before she dies,
Clorinda asks to be baptized, and then reveals herself to Tancredo.
The Christians celebrate their victory over the Muslims and the
restoration of Jerusalem into Christian hands. Godofre is crowned King
of Jerusalem.
Woven into this fabric are allegorical figures (Jerusalem, Travail,
Hope, Contentment, Liberty) that comment on the fate of Jerusalem
before and after the Christian victory, Christian captives in Jerusalem,
a Christian who has suffered hardships by walking to the Holy Land to
fight alongside Godofre, two soldiers who comment on their willingness
to participate in a just war.
Stefano Arata was the first to attribute this play to Cervantes in two
articles, one in 1992 and the other in 1997. In the article from 1992,
Arata provides a short study of the play along with an edition of the
manuscript text from the Palace Library. Arata bases his attribution to
Cervantes on four characteristics that he sees present also in Los tratos
and Numancia: a high number of characters, the use of figuras morales,
the meticulous description of costuming, and the use of theatrical
special effects.
In 1997, Arata presents the papeles de actor [actor’s parts] from a
folder that he had found in the Spanish National Library. The papeles
were sheets on which were written the lines that actors used to learn
and rehearse their parts in a play. Often these give the cue so that the
actor knows when to speak the lines. In the folder were, among others,
the lines for characters in La Jerusalén, namely Godofredo de Bullón,
Erminia, Solinda, and Teodoro. On the sheet that has Erminda’s lines,
there is reference to rehearsals and/or performances given in the
summer of 1586. Furthermore, the lines of Ocasión [Opportunity], one
of the allegorical figures in Los tratos, appear among those of the other
characters. This led Arata to believe that Los tratos was also being
rehearsed/performed during 1586.
At some unspecified time but following the publication of Arata’s
article in 1997, Florencio Sevilla Arroyo prepared two versions of the
text of La Jerusalén for the Biblioteca Virtual Miguel de Cervantes
[Miguel de Cervantes Virtual Library] (www.cervantesvirtual.com).23
One (Comedia de la conquista de Jerusalén por Godofre de Bullon [sic]
[Play about the Conquest of Jerusalem by Godfrey de Bouillon] is an image
of the manuscript in the Biblioteca de Palacio. The other (La conquista
de Jerusalén por Godofre de Bullón / obra atribuida a Miguel de
Cervantes Saavedra; edición de Florencio Sevilla Arroyo) [The Conquest
of Jerusalem by Godfrey de Bouillion/work attributed to Miguel de
Cervantes Saavedra, edition by Florencio Sevilla Arroyo] is in print
format that uses Arata’s version. There is no critical apparatus to
accompany either text.
Héctor Brioso Santos prepared, in 2009, a critical edition of the text
from the Biblioteca de Palacio for Cátedra. The introduction of more
than one hundred pages contains the most complete study of the play
to date. Footnotes clarify vocabulary and references. Brioso Santos
discusses the problem of authorship, the sources, language and style,
versification, stage directions, allegorical figures and scenes, and the
relationship between the three early plays: Los tratos, Numancia, and La
Jerusalén. While he never states unequivocally that Cervantes is the
author, one infers from the textual evidence that he believes the play to
be by Cervantes.
Alfredo Rodríguez López-Vázquez, writing in 2011, states that by
analysing forty words and phrases from La Jerusalén and by comparing
them with other Cervantine texts and with dramatic texts by some of
his contemporaries (Virués, Juan de la Cueva, Gabriel Lobo, and Rey de
Artieda) during the years 1580–95, he finds that Cervantes wrote La
Jerusalén around 1585. The critic then gives a detailed philological
analysis of twenty of these phrases that aims to clarify textual problems
that Arata and Brioso had not resolved in their editions of the play.
This same critic published an e-book edition of the play on 11
November 2014 that includes an introduction and notes. López-
Vázquez here reaffirms his stance that Cervantes wrote the play. In his
endeavour to present a clearer reading of the text, López-Vázquez
corrects questions of vocabulary by comparing phrases and syntax that
he finds in La Jerusalén with similar ones in other Cervantine texts.
These are not the same words and phrases that he had included in his
article three years earlier. One notable change happens with the
character that Arata, Sevilla Arroyo, and Brioso Santos read as
LUSTAQUIO (I, 420–651); López-Vázquez reads it as EUSTAQUIO.
Aaron M. Kahn defends his belief that Cervantes is the likely author
of La Jerusalén in 2010. Kahn continues what Arata began by exploring
the use of similar words and phrases in works known to be by
Cervantes; a comparison of characters, especially between Escipión in
Numancia and Godofre in Jerusalén and the use of allegorical figures in
both dramas; the use of explicit stage directions; versification; and
comparisons with plays by other Spanish dramatists of the 1580s.
Moisés R. Castillo, writing in 2012, compares Jerusalén with three
other plays by Cervantes that speak to the question of captivity and the
relationship between Christians and Muslims: Los tratos de Argel, La
gran sultana, and Los baños de Argel. After reviewing the criticism of
Jerusalén, he then compares the four plays. His main focus is on the
clash of human weakness in both Christians and Muslims with an
‘exagerada fervor religioso’ [‘exaggerated religious fervour’] of
Christian characters.24 Castillo also details the personal mini-dramas in
the suffering of captives as well as the humanitarian treatment toward
the Other, situations that he sees as a result of war and captivity. In
these ambiguous spaces where both Christian and Muslim values
intertwine, Castillo sees the hand of Cervantes. For this critic, Jerusalén
in all likelihood is by Cervantes.
Kahn returns to Jerusalén in 2013. Kahn continues his belief that
Cervantes is the probable author of Jerusalén. He reviews the criticism
up to that date, as well as defends his previous stance. Kahn is a firm
believer that the historicity of these three early plays gives us an
insight into human thoughts, emotions, and suffering as they occur in
captivity. Rather than only considering versification or comparing
vocabulary used in the plays, Kahn views these similar human thoughts
and emotions in the three plays as a compelling argument for Cervantes
as possible author. He also includes in his article a reproduction and
transcription of the manuscript pages of the papel de actor for Ocasión.
He then compares the lines among the various manuscript versions to
demonstrate that the text is basically the same.
Only two, or possibly three, plays survive from this first period when
Cervantes tried his hand at writing for the stage. For whatever reason,
the author of Don Quixote did not return to the genre until he published
the Ocho comedias y ocho entremeses near the end of his life. The early
plays are marked by having a large cast of characters (over twenty), the
use of allegorical figures who do not interact with the other characters
but act much like a Greek Chorus to comment or prophesy, a wide use
of metrical forms, explicit stage directions and decorations, and
references to the time that Cervantes spent in Algiers as a captive. Why
did he abandon the theatre? Today, some four centuries later, we can
only speculate. By his own admission, Cervantes says that he had other
things to do. Furthermore, he evidently felt that he could not, or would
not, compete with the new formula for stage productions that Lope de
Vega created beginning in the late 1580s.
Works Cited
Arata, Stefano. ‘La conquista de Jerusalén, Cervantes y la generación teatral de
1580’. Criticón LIV (1992): pp. 9–112.
Arata, Stefano. ‘Notas sobre La conquista de Jerusalén y la transmisión
manuscrita del primer teatro cervantino’. Edad de Oro XVI (1997): pp. 53–66.
Armstrong-Roche, Michael. ‘(The) Patria Besieged: Border–Crossing Paradoxes
of National Identity in Cervantes’s Numancia’. In Border Interrogations:
Questioning Spanish Frontiers, edited by Benita Sampedro Vizcaya and Simon
Doubleday (New York and Oxford: Berghahn Books, 2008), pp. 204–27.
Burk, Rachel L. ‘“La patria consumida”: Blood, Nation, and Eucharist in
Cervantes’s Numancia’. Journal of Spanish Cultural Studies 13, no. 1 (2012): pp.
1–19.
Canavaggio, Jean. ‘A propos de deux ‘comedias’ de Cervantes’. Bulletin
Hispanique 68 (1966): pp. 5–29.
Canavaggio, Jean. Cervantes, translated by J. R. Jones (New York: Norton and
Co., 1990).
Canavaggio, Jean. Cervantès dramaturge: un théâtre à naître (Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France, 1977).
Casalduero, Joaquín. Sentido y forma del teatro de Cervantes (Madrid: Gredos,
1974).
Castillo, Moisés R. ‘Espacios de ambigüedad en el teatro cervantino: La conquista
de Jerusalén y los dramas de cautiverio’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes
Society of America 32, no. 2 (2012): pp. 123–42.
Castillo, Moisés R. ‘¿Ortodoxia cervantina? Un análisis de La gran sultana, El
trato de Argel y Los baños de Argel’. Bulletin of the Comediantes 56, no. 2
(2004): pp. 219–40.
Cervantes, Miguel de. Comedias y entremeses, edited by Rodolfo Schevill y
Adolfo Bonilla, 6 vols. (Madrid: B. Rodríguez, 1915–22).
Cervantes, Miguel de. El cerco de Numancia, edited by Robert Marrast. 3rd ed.
(Madrid: Cátedra, 1995).
Cervantes, Miguel de. El trato de Argel, edited by Kathleen Thornton
Spinnenweber. (Newark, DE: European Masterpieces, 2011. Cervantes & Co.
No. 59).
¿Cervantes, Miguel de? La conquista de Jerusalén por Godofre de Bullón, edited by
Alfredo Rodríguez López-Vázquez. Clásicos Hispánicos (49). November 11,
2014. September 19, 2015. http://www.clasicoshispanicos.com.
Cervantes, Miguel de (Attributed). La conquista de Jerusalén por Godofre de
Bullón, edited by Héctor Brioso Santos (Madrid: Cátedra, 2009).
Cervantes, Miguel de. La destrucción de Numancia, edited by Alfredo
Hermenegildo (Madrid: Castalia, 1967).
Cervantes, Miguel de. La destrucción de Numancia, edited by Ricardo Doménech
(Madrid: Taurus, 1967).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Obras completas, edited by Angel Valbuena Prat (Madrid:
Aguilar, 1967).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Obra completa. 3 vols, edited by Florencio Sevilla Arroyo
& Antonio Rey Hazas (Alcalá de Henares: Centro de Estudios Cervantinos,
1995).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Tragedia de Numancia, edited by Alfredo Baras Escolá
(Zaragoza: Prensas Universitarias de Zaragoza, 2009).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Tragedia de Numancia, edited by Gastón Gilabert. Clásicos
Hispánicos (48). 25 September 2014. 19 September 2015. http://
www.clasicoshispanicos.com.
Cervantes, Miguel de. La Numancia, edited by Alison Caplan and Bryan Betancur
(Newark, DE: European Masterpieces, 2010. Cervantes & Co No. 33).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Teatro completo, edited by Florencio Sevilla Arroyo y
Antonio Rey Hazas (Barcelona: Planeta, 1987).
Checa, Jorge. ‘Razón subjetiva y ética de lo sublime en La destruición de
Numancia’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 33, no. 2
(2013): pp. 119–44.
Crawford, J. P. Wickersham. Spanish Drama Before Lope de Vega, edited by
Warren McCrady (Philadelphia: U of Pennsylvania P, 1967).
Domínguez, Julia. ‘Los escenarios de la memoria: psicodrama en El trato de Argel
de Cervantes’. Bulletin of the Comediantes 61 (2009): pp. 1–23.
Edwards, Gwynne. ‘La estructura de Numancia en el desarrollo de su ambiente
trágico’. In Cervantes: su obra y su mundo. Actas del I Congreso Internacional
sobre Cervantes, edited by Manuel Criado de Val (Madrid: EDI–6, 1981), pp.
293–301.
Friedman, Edward H. The Unifying Concept: Approaches to the Structure of
Cervantes’s Comedias (York, SC: Spanish Literature Publications Co, 1981).
Garcés, María Antonia. Cervantes en Argel. Historia de un cautivo (Madrid:
Gredos, 2005).
Garcés, María Antonia. Cervantes in Algiers. A Captive’s Tale (Nashville:
Vanderbilt UP, 2002).
García, Martha. ‘El uso del orden y el desorden como técnica de expresión
estética en La Numancia’. In Hacia la tragedia áurea. Lecturas para un nuevo
milenio, edited by Frederick A. de Armas, Luciano García Lorenzo, and
Enrique García Santo-Tomás (Madrid: Iberoamericana; Frankfort: Vervuet,
2008): pp. 255–63.
García-Martín, Elena. ‘Revisiones al tema numantino en Cervantes y Rojas
Zorrilla: ritualización y desmitificación del mito patrio’. Bulletin of the
Comediantes 61 (2009): pp. 83–102.
Graf, E. C. ‘The Devil’s Perspective in El Greco’s Alegoría de la Liga Santa, San
Juan de la Cruz’s Cántico espiritual, and Cervantes’s La Numancia’. Romance
Notes 53 (2013): pp. 53–64.
Hermenegildo, Alfredo. La tragedia en el Renacimiento español (Barcelona:
Planeta, 1973).
Kahn, Aaron M. ‘Even Further Towards a Theory of Attribution: Advancing the
Cervantine Attribution of La conquista de Jerusalén por Godofre de Bullón’.
Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 33, no.1 (2013): pp. 133–
65.
Kahn, Aaron M. The Ambivalence of Imperial Discourse: Cervantes’s ‘La Numancia’
within the ‘Lost Generation’ of Spanish Drama (1570–90) (Bern: Peter Lang,
2008).
Kahn, Aaron M. ‘Towards a Theory of Attribution: Is La conquista de Jerusalén by
Miguel de Cervantes?’ Journal of European Studies 40, no. 2 (2010): pp. 99–
128.
López-Vázquez, Alfredo Rodríguez. ‘Un tríptico presuntamente cervantino: La
Jerusalén, Los habladores y el auto de La Virgen de Guadalupe’. Rivista di
Filologia e Letterature Ispaniche XIV (2011): pp. 57–76.
Mandel, Adrienne Schizzano. ‘La Numancia: Cuando el último hombre ha dicho
su última palabra’. In Cervantes: Su obra y su mundo. Actas del I Congreso
Internacional sobre Cervantes, edited by Manuel Criado de Val (Madrid: EDI–6,
1981), pp. 317–23.
Martel, José and Hyman Alpern, editors. Diez comedias del siglo de oro (New
York: Harper and Row, 1968).
McKendrick, Melveena. ‘Writings for the Stage’. In The Cambridge Companion to
Cervantes, edited by Anthony J. Cascardi. (Cambridge, UK; Cambridge UP,
2002), pp. 131–59.
Moreno Hernández, Carlos. ‘El jirón lusitano en La Numancia: siglo de oro e
imperio católico’. Bulletin of Hispanic Studies 89, no. 1 (2012): pp. 15–30.
Ohanna, Natalio. ‘Lamentos de doble filo: El trato de Argel y la dimensión
geopolítica de la lucha por la unidad religiosa’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the
Cervantes Society of America 30, no. 1 (2010): pp. 141–61.
Patterson, Charles. ‘Los tratos de Argel and the Muslim Story of Joseph and
Potiphar’s Wife’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 33, no.
1 (2013): pp. 113–31.
Peña, Margarita. ‘La esencia de la tragedia: alegoría, recursos escénicos e
infortunio en La destrucción de Numancia, de Cervantes’. In Hacia la tragedia
áurea. Lecturas para un nuevo milenio, edited by Frederick A. de Armas,
Luciano García Lorenzo, and Enrique García Santo-Tomás (Madrid:
Iberoamericana; Frankfort: Vervuet, 2008), pp. 57–80.
Petro, Antonia. ‘El fallido ritual sacrificial en La Numancia de Cervantes’.
Bulletin of Spanish Studies 82, no. 6 (2005): pp. 753–72.
Riley, E. C. ‘The pensamientos escondidos and the figuras morales of Cervantes’. In
Homenaje a William L. Fichter, edited A. David Kossoff and José Amor y
Vázquez. (Madrid: Gredos, 1971), pp. 623–31.
Rupp, Stephen. ‘Remembering 1541: Crusade and Captivity in the Algiers Plays
of Cervantes’. Revista de Estudios Hispánicos 32 (1998): pp. 313–35.
Selig, Karl-Ludwig. ‘La Numancia: A Reconsideration of the Duero Speech’. In
Homenaje a William L. Fichter, edited by A. David Kossoff and José Amor y
Vázquez. (Madrid: Gredos, 1971), pp. 681–5.
Stagg, Geoffrey. ‘The date and form of El trato de Argel’. Bulletin of Hispanic
Studies 30 (1953): pp. 181–92.
Tar, Jane. ‘Hamartia in La Numancia’. Romance Notes 45 (2004): pp. 55–61.
Vivar, Francisco. “La Numancia” de Cervantes y la memoria de un mito (Madrid:
Biblioteca Nueva, 2004).
Wyszinski, Matthew A. ‘Civil Oratory in Cervantes’s La Numancia’. Syposium 68
(2014): pp. 25–36.
Zimic, Stanislav. El teatro de Cervantes (Madrid: Castalia, 1992).
Zimic, Stanislav. ‘Visión política y moral de Cervantes en Numancia’. Anales
cervantinos XVIII (1979–80): pp. 107–50.
1 Canavaggio, Cervantes, p. 114.
2 Cervantes, Obras completas (Valbuena Prat), p. 180.
3 All translations are those of the author of this chapter, unless otherwise
noted.
4 There exist only two manuscripts of Los tratos. One is housed in the
Spanish National Library in Madrid; the other in the library of the Hispanic
Society of America in New York. See Kahn, ‘Even Further…’, pp. 157–8 for a
discussion of the manuscript copies of Los tratos, La Numancia, and La Jerusalén.
5 Crawford, p. 180.
6 Canavaggio, Cervantès dramaturge, p. 125.
7 Zimic, El teatro…, p. 55.
8 Cervantes, Obra completa, v. 3, p. 1025, fn. 2.
9 Garcés, Cervantes in Algiers, p. 176.
10 Castillo, ‘¿Ortodoxia cervantina?…’, p. 220.
11 Castillo, ‘Espacios…’, p. 140.
12 p. 75.
13 p. 75.
14 Selig, p. 685.
15 p. 318.
16 p. 56.
17 p. 755.
18 Petro, p. 772.
19 p. 224.
20 l. 517.
21 Graf, p. 59.
22 Graf, pp. 59–60.
23 While there is not a publication date on the Biblioteca Virtual Cervantes
website, Alfredo López-Vázquez, writing in the introduction to his electronic
edition of the play in 2014, states that Sevilla Arroyo published it in 2012.
24 Castillo, ‘Espacios…’, p. 128.
Chapter 16
Ocho comedias (1615)
Melanie S. Henry
Queen’s University Belfast
Miguel de Cervantes is best known for his unparalleled contribution to
Spanish letters in the form of the incomparable Don Quixote—the
author’s magnum opus. Although the publication of the novel charting
the would-be knight’s fantastical adventures heralded Cervantes’s
literary prowess and secured his iconic status in Spanish cultural
history, the novelist yearned for recognition and envisaged success as a
playwright. Díez Borque has rightly declared Cervantes a ‘man of the
theatre; preoccupied and even obsessed by it’.1 Certainly, the aspiring
dramatist’s own recollections, as emphasized by the prologue to his
published plays, portray a picture of a young and eager Cervantes
spectating at dramatic events and contemplating the workings of
theatrical 
representation. 
The 
playwright’s 
prologue 
reflects
nostalgically on the feats achieved by his precursor, ‘el gran Lope de
Rueda’ [the great Lope de Rueda], whilst lauding the supremacy of a
stage that prioritized the dramatization of the spoken word and
shunned hyperbolic manifestations of an overly adorned stage.2 This
concern with matters pertaining to spectacle would remain unaltered
during the course of Cervantes’s career and contribute to his resistance
to and departure from established theatrical conventions, as this
chapter will outline.
Despite Cervantes’s passion for the theatre and his desire to succeed
as a playwright, scholarship generally acknowledges that his attempts
at drama were unsuccessful in terms of their own immediate context as
well as the works’ reception (both critical and performative) in more
recent history.3 The reasons for Cervantes’s apparent ‘failure’ are
complex and not easily reduced to a formula that highlights a deficient
theatrical gene lurking in the corpus of his writings for the stage. The
Ocho comedias, the focus of this particular chapter, hold a conflicted
and uneasy position within the Cervantine canon. Often overlooked in
favour of the infinitely more successful Don Quixote or Novelas
ejemplares, Cervantes’s comedias might be said to occupy a sort of
literary ‘limbo’ in which numerous factors compete with their viability
as artefacts worthy of the type of rigorous and demanding investigation
so readily achieved by the author’s more famous works.
Among the reasons that contribute to Cervantes’s dramatic output
receiving scant recognition and the perception that he is somewhat
inadequate as a playwright, is the fact that none of his plays in the
collection were performed in his lifetime. Moreover, a legacy of
negative scholarship and harsh critical judgement should not be
discounted from the elements that have conspired to exclude
Cervantes’s dramatic output from more serious and sustained
consideration. A key contributing factor must also be the tendency to
survey Cervantes vis-à-vis his nemesis and the creator of Spain’s highly
successful national theatre, Lope de Vega. Additionally, our privileged
position 
as 
twenty-first-century 
critics 
allows 
us 
to 
reflect
retrospectively on the formation and, indeed, construction of the
Golden Age theatrical canon and understand that a body of key texts
have emerged for scrutiny to the detriment of numerous play texts that
have escaped critical notice to date. Collectively, the above listed
factors, amongst others, have worked against Cervantine theatre,
sometimes creating the misplaced impression of a negatively charged
and comparatively irrelevant body of work.
Lope de Vega exercised a theatrical monopoly at a time when
Cervantes longed for success as a functioning playwright.4 It is evident
that Cervantes keenly felt his isolation from the theatrical culture
emerging at the beginning of the new century as well as a growing
concern with the condition of the public stage. In particular, Cervantes
retained anxieties about the commercialization of drama and resisted
the idea of consumer demand as a barometer for the outworking of
artistic endeavour.5 Spadaccini states: ‘While Cervantes explicitly
renounces the mediations of producers and actors and shows disdain
for the “mass” audience of the public theatre, Lope was to make all
sorts of compromises for the benefit of that audience to ensure his plays
a favourable reception.’6 Nonetheless, it would be unjust to portray
Cervantes as a dogmatic figure clinging desperately to dramatic
traditions of the past whilst battling public-driven fashions and Lope’s
redefinition of dramatic art. Reed rightly notes that there exists a ‘too
convenient impression that Cervantes and Lope were in complete
disagreement concerning the value of contemporary dramatic
conventions, and that Cervantes the “classicist” refused to accept Lope’s
innovations’.7 Zimic sustains that it is a grave error to think that
Cervantes opposed changes within the dramatic arena purely on the
basis that they were changes.8 As more recent criticism evidences,
Cervantes, too, attempted modifications within the parameters of early
modern Spanish theatre, and crafted theatre that may now
appropriately be termed experimental.9
As intimated above, Cervantes’s disappointments and the title with
which he published his theatre have created a certain stigma and
generated the impression that Cervantes is a ‘failed’ dramatist. Such a
notion has contributed decisively to the small space that Cervantes’s
comedias occupy in the field of Cervantine and Golden Age dramatic
studies. Not until the middle of the twentieth century was Cervantes’s
theatre subject to any serious examination, although minor studies and
editions of these works had been published in the early part of the
century by authors/editors such as Schevill and Bonilla, Cotarelo y
Valledor, and Valbuena Prat. Casalduero’s 1951 study of Cervantes’s
theatre signalled a shift in Cervantine dramatic studies when the
scholar offered a sustained evaluation of the author’s writings for the
stage and asserted a more critical approach, which marked a move
away from historiographical and biographical concerns. Canavaggio’s
pioneering Cervantès dramaturge: un théâtre à naître is a study that
underscored the validity of rigorous analysis.
During the last four decades Cervantes’s theatre has experienced a
certain regeneration as critical scrutiny recuperates a drama which long
languished in the shadow of the Quixote. Various Cervantistas have
made an influential mark on the field and contributed enormously to
scholarship. Critics such as Wardropper, Friedman, Spadaccini, Zimic,
Maestro, and Henry, among others, have published monographic as
well as smaller studies of work which, collectively, assert the value of
the comedias, but more significantly, promote judicious perspectives
which highlight the autonomy, intricacy, and multifaceted qualities of
a challenging and probing body of plays. While distinct in their
approaches—and sometimes opposing—the above works offer a sense
of a highly self-conscious dramatic imagination which is creatively and
perspicaciously engaged with its contexts.
Over the years, various volumes have been dedicated to Cervantes’s
stage as well as journal issues and miscellaneous studies.10 Sterling
editions of the comedias, such as that proffered by Sevilla Arroyo and
Rey Hazas, have greatly facilitated and supported critical inquest.
Although Cervantine dramatic studies are overshadowed by projects
dedicated to the writer’s prose, it is not an entirely unexplored or
unchartered field. Notwithstanding the work that remains to be done,
scholarship has emphasized positively that we cannot afford to ignore
Cervantes’s theatrical writings, despite the fact that success eluded
him.11 Weimar suggests that much of the explanation for neglect of
Cervantes’s comedias:
lies not in the texts, but in ourselves—or more precisely, in the
challenge these texts present to our theatrical, and especially Golden
Age theatrical, horizon of expectations…they [Ocho comedias] might
well also leave modern readers of early modern peninsular drama,
readers most accustomed to Golden Age works following the precepts
laid down in Lope’s Arte nuevo de hacer comedias, somewhat
interpretively at sea.12
Vigorous investigation in later years might have provided an anchor to
which students of the Ocho comedias can cling, but the fact remains that
the scholar must confront a complex and demanding theatre with a
proclivity to break the mould. Interpretative waters have been muddied
further by the persistent qualification that Cervantes’s comedias are
dissimilar and inferior to Lope’s dramatic ventures: ‘Evaluation of
Cervantes’s drama as “anti-Lope” created with the sole purpose of
voicing 
the 
dramatist’s 
preoccupation 
with 
Lope’s 
theatrical
domination, has resulted in a one dimensional argument that tends to
prioritize what Cervantes’s theatre does or, indeed, does not do within
a very limited context.’13 Likewise, González, Maestro and others have
condemned such a reductionist critical methodology. Maestro observes
that reading and seeing the Ocho comedias as a result of an impotency
to adapt to current dramatic trends equates to proposing a false
solution to an equally false problem. In the scholar’s opinion, Cervantes
never wanted to imitate his peers, the comedia nueva, or Lope de Vega.
Rather, the playwright attempted to fashion an alternative theatre.14
Thus, the comedias have suffered as a result of a flawed argument,
which perceives Cervantes’s plays as defective simply because they do
not subscribe to the fashions of the time. Maestro demonstrates that
Cervantes and Lope are not easily compared and to insist on such an
assessment gravely limits our interpretative capabilities. In other
words, qualifying the Ocho comedias vis-à-vis Lope closes down rather
than opens up enquiry. It is, therefore, imperative that students and
scholars of Cervantes’s dramatic output recognize the theatre’s anti-
comedia objectives and thus move beyond these in order to interrogate
robustly the playwright’s alternative stage and realize the value of the
Ocho comedias on their own aesthetic terms.
The comedias broach many of the concepts, ideas, and themes
incorporated throughout the Cervantine canon within both a literary
and extra-literary context. In particular, they dialogue very distinctly
with wider sociocultural concerns and provide an outlet for artistic
expression of the troubled realities of early modern Spain. Syverson-
Stork aptly notes that Cervantes’s theatre persistently manifests the
playwright’s desire to expose his nation’s problematical present.15
Throughout his drama, Cervantes engages with the anxieties and
complexities inherent within a fractured environment typified by
desengaño [disillusionment] and plagued by the dark realities of a
weakened political-economic infrastructure and a precarious power
base, among other pressing issues.16 Spadaccini and Talens comment:
‘The effervescence and continual change that traverse Spain, from
imperial expansion to the bankruptcy of the state, serve not only as a
historical and cultural frame but are also inscribed, analysed, and
deconstructed through Cervantes’s literary discourse.’17 The Ocho
comedias are no exception; they cast a critical and discriminating look
over the conflicts facing the early modern Spanish nation-state and the
tumultuous society in which the comedias were conceived. Cervantes’s
full-length plays represent a preoccupation with the complexities and
contradictions of the prevailing worldview and the ideologies espoused
by the Castilian state. The dramatist deals provocatively with concerns
such as limpieza de sangre [blood purity], the racial supremacy of the
Spaniard, the expulsion and persecution of minority groups, and the
impact of Spain’s imperial policies (among many other polemical but
less lofty affairs) in a decidedly perverse fashion. In fact, Cervantes’s
comedias exhibit a ‘transgressive compulsion’ to challenge and contest
dominant principles and dogma.18 Cervantes’s ‘alternative’ theatre
operates as a questioning aesthetic, which interrogates and probes the
limits of Baroque consciousness. The Ocho comedias, therefore,
formulate and promote a counter-perspective to the discourses and
structures which underpin Golden-Age Spain.
Such a contradiction is also apparent in Cervantes’s opposition to the
dominant stage. The comedias may make a few formal concessions to
the Lopean formula, but they predominantly operate against the grain
of the public theatre and prevailing dramatic imaginings, which, in
Cervantes’s opinion, functioned as an instrument of propaganda that
endorsed governing infrastructures.19 Collectively, the Cervantine
resistance to contemporary dramatic methodologies and dominant
sociocultural practices creates a seditious theatre, which flouts
established perceptions and destabilizes widespread ‘certainties’. Such a
violation may go some way to explaining Cervantes’s marginalization
from early modern Spanish dramatic culture and the lack of interest
exhibited by play producers of the time. Certainly, Cervantes’s
antagonistic strategies would have wielded implications for his
audience, had his theatre ever received one. The playwright, having
been willing to expend the effort to confront and engage with a
spectator conditioned by the system of expectations ratified by the
comedia nueva, communicates a theatre which did not permit collusion
with the status quo.20 In other words, Cervantes’s comedias promote
and, in fact, stimulate examination of the climate in which the
seventeenth-century Spanish spectator lives. Such a strategy fabricates
conditions that do not permit an audience to ‘tilt at windmills’ and
invest in the ‘realities’ promoted by either stage or state. Ultimately,
the audience, and early modern Spanish subject, is liberated from a
more passive reception of the signs at play.
Spirited critical argument of late has emphasized the comedias’
concept of freedom as an issue which demands attention within the
parameters of Cervantes’s interrogative approach.21 Cervantes was well
aware that the profoundly disrupted society in which the individual
lived had produced an alienated and unsettled subject.22 Consequently,
an insecure and complex relationship existed at micro and macro levels
between the early modern Spaniard and their environment. Throughout
his literary discourse, Cervantes remains profoundly preoccupied by the
freedom of the individual as it affected the seventeenth-century Spanish
subject and displays great concern for the tensions provoked by the
uneasy correlation between individual inclination and societal
pressure.23 The comedias give voice to such anxieties as Cervantes
positions centre-stage in self-consciously provocative texts the
conflicted and contradictory subject who is coerced by a wide range of
social and political disputes which impinge on his/her place in the
world. Designated as ‘la poética de la libertad’, Cervantes’s comedias
expose the restricted freedom of the individual as a key component of a
complex Baroque subjectivity.24 The Ocho comedias bring to the fore
individual selfhood as an entity in and of itself within a contestatory
context in relation to the power structures of Counter-Reformation
Spain. As McKendrick states, in Cervantes’s world ‘there is always the
sense of a definable self to be discovered, cultivated and adhered to in
the face of the world’s pressures’.25 The playwright’s dramatization of
individual, national, and artistic selfhoods formulate a dissident
aesthetic which persistently scrutinize—and subvert—the systems and
authorities of his own day, and the place of the Spanish subject within
these.
The Ocho comedias are as unorthodox in form as they are in the
poetics and perspectives they disseminate. The eight plays are not
easily classified and do not fit neatly into the categories conventionally
ascribed to Golden-Age theatre. According to Canavaggio, some of the
typical comedia nueva characteristics intrude into Cervantes’s play
texts.26 These are largely structural and represent minor allowances for
an audience well-tuned to Lopean principles. The system of values and
ideals present in Lope’s stage is conspicuously absent in the Cervantine
comedia. Crowd-pleasing concerns—such as notions of honour and
monarchy—are not permitted to take centre-stage.27 When surveyed as
a collection, the comedias may appear very distinct but they do offer a
more cohesive aesthetic than scholarship has often allowed.28 For
instance, the plays harness various techniques which collectively
underline Cervantes’s preoccupation with dramatic writing as well as
his acute understanding of the dynamic between stage and audience
and the mediations which implicate reception of the spectacle.
Existing criticism on the Ocho comedias mostly takes the form of
small and diverse individual studies (journal articles, conference
proceedings, etc.), which have evoked a wide-range of responses.29
Unfortunately, such a disparate approach has generally deterred
comparative and/or holistic approaches that seek to value the plays as
a body of work. It is, however, entirely possible to identify
commonalities in the comedias that permit a coherent approach as well
as a much more robust investigation of what Cervantes’s theatre does.
Thus, the remainder of this chapter offers a brief analysis of particular
aspect(s) of each play but connects the comedias in three groups: the
comedias that appear to emulate (and subsequently deconstruct) Lope;
the plays that deal overtly with captivity/freedom; and the dramas that
dialogue with Cervantes’s conception of dramatic art and the medium
of the stage itself.30 While these ‘categories’ persistently overlap, they
provide a systematic framework within which the qualities of
Cervantes’s alternative theatrical aesthetic may be observed.
La entretenida; El laberinto de amor; La casa
de los celos y las selvas de Ardenia
Three of Cervantes’s comedias are considered to be more directly
influenced by Lope de Vega’s theatrical model: La entretenida; El
laberinto de amor; and La casa de los celos y las selvas de Ardenia. Whilst
it is important to acknowledge the ‘anti-Lope’ aspects inherent within
these comedias, a move beyond analysis of the texts as a frustrated
reaction to the comedia nueva’s dramatic monopoly provides scope for a
more composite interpretation. This is particularly significant with
regards to La entretenida, a play which is typically examined as a
parody of Lope’s capa y espada formula [cape and sword play].31 The
drama is set within an aristocratic household in Madrid and distorts
many of the elements familiar to a Golden Age audience: the master/
servant relationship; convoluted love plots; disguise and mistaken
identity, etcetera. Interestingly, the play calls express attention to the
fact that it closes without marriage—a well-worn device in the corral.
Despite the seemingly frivolous subject matter—love twists and
triangles—the drama bristles with dark undertones and insinuates
challenging (and even oppressive) struggles, which confront the
individual.
Cervantes’s nonconventional representation of women in La
entretenida generates much of the drama’s tension and has been
identified as one of the threads that threaten the play’s funny
business.32 The drama is dominated by noblemen who dictate the lives
of their households, daughters, and would-be wives. The three female
protagonists—Marcela Osorio, Marcela Almendárez, and Cristina—are
bound by the diktat articulated by Ocaña in Act I: ‘La mujer ha de ser
buena, / y parercerlo, que es más’ [‘A woman must be good and,
furthermore, be seen to be good’].33 To varying degrees, however, all
three women disrupt expectations placed upon them and negotiate
their selfhoods in ways that oppose the status quo. This is most evident
within the character of Marcela Osorio, a noblewoman promised in
marriage to Don Antonio. Marcela is confined to a monastery by her
father, Don Pedro, while he negotiates a marriage contract and dowry
and her character remains absent from the stage for the duration of the
play. Don Pedro’s speech in Act III, in which he likens his daughter to
an ‘armiño aprisionado’ [‘imprisoned ermine’], paints a bleak picture of
female containment and the subjugation of women to patriarchal
codes.34 Marcela has little value beyond her usefulness as an object of
exchange in a business which promotes the commodification of the
female. Nonetheless, Marcela will not tolerate physical nor textual
incarceration and contracts a legal document with Don Ambrosio, the
man whom she loves. Marcela Osorio, therefore, exercises male
prerogatives and interferes compellingly in the public sphere. As is the
case with many Cervantine heroines, she deploys her voice (albeit in a
paradoxical fashion) in a highly skilful and strategic fashion. Marcela
produces a text and becomes the author of her own life in a scene
which clearly foregrounds the power and potential of the written word.
Her successful attempt to circumvent the desires of others highlights
inner resolve and free will as fatal challenges to the mechanisms of
control, which demand submission.
The subversion of social standards and the autonomy of the
individual are well expressed in the entremés in Act III. Cervantes uses
the play within the play to disrupt the Lopean formula and carve a
distinctly Cervantine space in which his own dramatic voice and values
are firmly highlighted. Throughout La entretenida, principles of
hierarchy are severely undercut by the working class who assume
leading roles and forge their own plots. The servants articulate two
thirds of the drama’s lines and upstage their masters at every turn.
Cervantes grants his characters ample room to express the hardships
they suffer and the exploitation they endure at the hands of the
Almendárez family. When the servants elect to stage a play in Act III as
a means of escaping the daily grind of life, they cast their employers in
the role of audience. The servants quite literally upstage their masters
as they pull the nobility into an intricate fiction from which they
cannot extract themselves.
Significantly, within the interlude, the working class play
themselves. They re-represent their roles as servants and employ staged
dialogues in order to voice their displeasure and articulate the
hypocrisies of a repressive system that demands submission on the
basis of rank. The interlude, therefore, becomes a powerful vehicle that
allows temporary insubordination and acts as a mask behind which
unsettling truths may be securely revealed. The servants emerge as
clever, adroit individuals with feelings, desires, and an ingenuity their
noble counterparts do not possess. The play within the play, thus,
functions as an apparatus that permits self-expression and provides
scope for competing and seditious discourses and practices. As such,
the entremés not only encapsulates the nonconformist attitude of the
Cervantine stage but also its liberating potential.
El laberinto de amor, which precedes La entretenida in Cervantes’s
published collection, is often regarded as Cervantes’s emulation of the
conventional capa y espada model. The play has been judged harshly on
account of its labyrinthine plot, despite the fact that its very title
evokes the confusion that the spectator will encounter. The drama
follows three young women, Rosamira, Julia, and Porcia, who are
determined to wield control over their restrictive circumstances and
marry the men of their choice. Through displays of bravery and
rebellion, the women fabricate and negotiate a tangled web of
deception and transformation to usurp male authority and secure their
desires. Like Marcela Osorio, the female protagonists navigate societal
demands by means of inventive strategies. Critical studies of El laberinto
have established that the women resourcefully manipulate speech and
roleplay in their bid for a degree of autonomy, prompting evaluation of
Cervantes’s treatment of ‘freer’ female expression within the constraints
of Counter-Reformation Spain.35
Cervantes uses the labyrinth motif to convey usefully the confusing
realities of contemporary life. Drawing on Ovid’s account of the Cretan
labyrinth, Cervantes exploits the classical source to create a maze
through which his characters journey on a voyage of self-discovery. The
play highlights the struggle of the women to assert themselves as
individuals insofar as they are subject to authoritarian values, which
dictate their repressive position within society. Cervantes’s heroines
embark on a quest to overturn the decisions imposed upon them within
a female-authored drama that ventriloquizes female objectives whilst
casting their unwitting male counterparts as co-players. Similar to La
entretenida, it is the marginal subject who paradoxically assumes a more
central role as the women undertake the influential position of creators
and artists.
The opening of the play sees Rosamira skilfully manipulating her
father’s insecurities regarding familial honour and, thus, orchestrate her
own incarceration; an initiative that avoids a loveless marriage and
secures her place at the centre of the metaphorical labyrinth from
which she can dictate how the drama unfolds. Once again we
encounter a competent heroine infringing on the male space and
displaying an innate sense of self. Cervantes imbues his female lead
with the power to rewrite her own future. This is evident also in Julia’s
pursuit of Manfredo. Her clever roleplay as the student Camilo sees her
relaying Julia’s feelings for Manfredo whilst engineering the
nobleman’s response. Julia’s wily refashioning of self inevitably
threatens male definitions of female behaviour and identity. Both Julia
and Rosamira’s schemes not only exemplify a supreme level of control
but also demonstrate the limitations of society’s power over the
internal. A strong sense of self and inner freedom exhibits the potential
to undermine and destabilize restrictions, which undoubtedly wields
wider implications for social conditioning.
At the end of the play, the women procure praise and admiration
from the men they have duped and ensure their love matches. Like La
entretenida’s Marcela, they have not refused to enact their place in
society but have insisted forcefully, via a host of meta-dramatic
strategies, how this role should be fulfilled. The spectator is well aware
that the heroines’ unorthodox conduct has been propelled by the
stringent rein on their freedom. El laberinto de amor has often drawn
comparisons with Lope as a result of its seemingly contrived closure of
multiple marriages—a device shunned by La entretenida and
condemned by Pedro de Urdemalas. Nevertheless, the use of the method
is striking precisely because Cervantes allows his heroines to write their
own ending to the story. Furthermore, the dénouement cannot entirely
expunge—nor contain—the heroines’ radical and nonconformist
behaviour. Castillo comments that many of the female characters in
Cervantes’s drama ‘challenge established moral and social codes, and
yet are not punished for their transgressions’; an observation which
places El laberinto at odds with the comedia nueva.36
As deviant, marginal creators, Rosamira, Porcia, and Julia are not
unlike Cervantes himself, who writes theatre on the fringe of acceptable
dramatic conventions and attempts to destabilize Lope’s theatrical
methodology. The women’s struggle to express themselves is not
dissimilar to Cervantes’s efforts to locate his peripheral voice more
prominently via the Ocho comedias. If El laberinto de amor and the
success of the female protagonists teach us anything, it is that such a
voice demands our critical gaze.
La casa de los celos y las selvas de Ardenia does not immediately strike
the reader/spectator as a dialogical work that contends with leading
dramatic models. However, Trambaioli’s 2004 work has competently
presented Cervantes’s play as a parody of some of Lope’s earlier
theatrical writings, all of which are heavily influenced by Ariosto and
chivalric material.37 La casa de los celos is complicated, highly complex,
and at times the drama borders on bewildering. Certainly it is
Cervantes’s least stage-able comedia and to date it has not been
performed. La casa has generated meagre debate; those studies that do
exist tend to promote issues around which there is little consensus.
Critical argument has attempted to locate the play’s unifying themes
and shed some light on its apparent lack of cohesion, as indicated by
the incompatible environments inscribed in the drama’s title.38
La casa de los celos adapts episodes from chivalric material and
maintains a complex intertextual relationship with its Italian
predecessors (Boiardo’s Orlando innamorato and Ariosto’s Orlando
furioso). The main plot charts the quest of two of Charlemagne’s
paladins—Reinaldos and Roldán—for the love of Angélica. The subplot
mirrors these amorous attempts in the form of a shepherdess, Clori,
who is pursued by two shepherds. The plot is further complicated by
the appearance of allegorical figures as well as Bernardo del Carpio and
Marfisa, who arrive in the forest of Ardenia in search of adventure.
Significantly, the drama’s literary self-consciousness constructs a play
that is defined entirely by literature. As such, the reader / spectator
might anticipate that there is an acute absence of reality or events with
which they can relate. Nonetheless, the play persistently denies its own
artifice by calling attention to the apparatus that informs it.
Throughout La casa, fiction is dismantled by illusion-breaking
techniques. The puncturing of fantasy generates a self-reflexive drama
that will have particular effects for a Golden Age dramatic audience
accustomed to the illusion-oriented spectacle engendered by the corral.
One of the most interesting elements of Cervantes’s comedia is
Malgesí, a character responsible for much of the plot’s magical
happenings. The magician is the voice of reason and discernment
among paladins who jump to conclusions and act on the basis of ill-
constructed notions. Malgesí deduces the often perverse motivations of
others and interferes in the plot to warn the onstage characters of
duplicitous devices that masquerade as reality. The enchanter performs
the role of ‘truth teller’ as he deconstructs the fraudulent operations of
Angélica and Galalón. The paladins, however, remain undeterred by his
cautions and appear to surrender willingly to the mechanisms deployed
by those who seek to manipulate them.
Malgesí provides the means through which the spectator is
prompted to exercise a level of discernment. He promotes conscientious
use of the magic arts and discourages the audience against receiving
the artifice unproblematically. The character is, therefore, a vehicle
that facilitates astute perception of the mechanisms of dramatic
fashioning. La casa de los celos operates beyond the bounds of aesthetic
issues. Bernardo del Carpio, an epic hero, suffers a crisis of identity that
brings into play ontological concerns and a warning that the spectator
must engage responsibly with the transmission of sociocultural and
political messages. The final scene of La casa, in which an angel
foretells the tragic fate of the protagonists, compounds the realities of
Spain’s aggressive imperial policies and its ever-weakened condition. As
a whole, and despite its flaws and incongruities, La casa de los celos
confronts its audience quite forcefully and emphasizes the Cervantine
stage as a theatre that does not permit complacency. The disintegration
of illusion may act as a ‘freeing’ mechanism that desensitizes an
audience away from propaganda disseminated by the public stage.
La entretenida, El laberinto, and La casa de los celos operate along
lines which negotiate and envision many of the social antagonisms
within early modern Spanish culture. Fuller exploration reveals
concerns ranging from individualism and social conflict to intertextual
and meta-theatrical anxieties. Examination of the three comedias
portrays Cervantine theatre as a stage that refuses to submit to
dramatic—or social—dictates. In each comedia, the playwright creates
artists who endorse responsible use of illusion and, therefore, an
ethically charged stage. Cervantes’s comedias evidently demand a
heightened level of scrutiny, a mandate which the more apathetic
seventeenth-century Spanish spectator may have refused, or been
unable, to acknowledge.
La gran sultana Doña Catalina de Oviedo; El
gallardo español; Los baños de Argel
La gran sultana Doña Catalina de Oviedo, El gallardo español, and Los
baños de Argel are commonly considered Cervantes’s comedias de
cautivos [captivity plays]. As explained in Chapter 4, Cervantes’s North
African imprisonment exerted a tremendous impact on his literary
output. The comedias de cautivos deal with the traumatic situation of the
captive and paint a dark picture of the bleak reality facing those
unfortunate enough to languish in prison and encounter oppressive
situations far from their homeland. Each of the plays dramatizes the
struggle between captive and captor and the issue of confinement is
represented in many different forms. Although the plays occur outside
of Spain (Constantinople, Oran, and Algiers, respectively), each comedia
de cautivos has at heart a preoccupation with the problems engaging the
Spanish nation-state.39
La gran sultana’s backdrop is an opulent Constantinople. The play
features another spirited heroine—the play’s namesake—who was
taken captive as a child and has been hidden away by servants of the
Gran Turco [Great Turk], unbeknownst to their leader. The title of the
comedia encapsulates the drama’s central dilemma; the Turco desires
Catalina and wishes to marry her, but the Spanish woman refuses to
renege her Catholic religion and Spanish identity. Thus, Doña Catalina
is trapped between the powerful jurisdiction of the Ottoman Empire
and her own value system. Despite the comedia’s many ludic elements,
darker impulses lurk beneath the outwardly benign surface text.
The play has attracted critical interest on account of its portrayal of
an inclusive Ottoman Empire that seemingly promotes ideals of
tolerance and an acceptance of ‘otherness’.40 This perception of liberal
values has secured the play’s popularity in more recent times and
Cervantes’s comedia has been adapted successfully for the stage.41 It
may be, however, that notions of cultural accommodation and
inclusivity have more in common with our own context than an early
modern Spanish world. Certainly, Pedraza Jiménez warns against
anachronistic evaluation that dislocates Cervantes from his own time
and place.42
Following this assessment, there is strong evidence to suggest that La
gran sultana does not propagate values of harmony, lenience, or
‘genuine love among people’.43 The play features a scene in which
Madrigal, a Spanish captive, breaks into a Jewish household and, in a
display of malignant behaviour, throws bacon into the stew pot. The
opening of Act II demonstrates how the Turkish leadership deals with
those to whom it is opposed. Such treatment involves ridicule,
aggression, and an inept ruler who is capricious and ineffectual. Most
significantly, the play does not involve the ‘inclusion’ of Doña Catalina,
but rather her exploitation.
From the outset, Catalina is described in terms that emphasize her
objectification by others. She resists the perceptions of others and
makes firm assertions about her own identity throughout the play:
‘Advierte que soy cristiana,/y que lo he de ser contino’ [‘I’m telling you
that I am a Christian, and I will continue to be so’].44 Catalina’s defiant
stance coupled with her insistence on preserving her Spanish dress and
name collectively projects a strong sense of ideal Catholic selfhood.
Nonetheless, Catalina’s forceful declarations of her identity are eclipsed
by the Turk’s disinterest in her person and individuality. Throughout
the play, the Turco attaches utmost value to her appearance and the
possession of her body rather than the inclinations of her soul. In an
environment that obsesses with the external and in which she is
contained, Catalina’s counter-discourse is futile. Thus, the signifiers
that underpin Spanish national selfhood are challenged and revealed as
insecure. La gran sultana portrays the individual as a displaced entity in
an environment in which self-determination is redundant.
Cervantes’s Constantinople, therefore, has much in common with an
early modern Spanish world accustomed to the clash between personal
inclination and prevailing standards.
The play concludes with Madrigal preparing to leave Constantinople
with plans to stage Catalina’s (hi)story in the Madrid corral. The
metadramatic strategy disperses the distance between Spain and Turkey
and encourages the offstage spectator to consider carefully the play that
they have just watched. La gran sultana’s final scene resists firm closure
and leaves the audience with more questions than answers as the birth
of the Sultan and Catalina’s child is proclaimed. While the Sultan’s
servants celebrate the news, the spectator is left to ponder the
allegiance of the new heir and the fate of Catalina. The ending is,
therefore, wholly unstable and the play finishes as it begins—Catalina
de Oviedo is captive within the Ottoman Empire. In this case, marriage
and birth do not provide the obligatory happy ending for the corral
audience. Rather, the conclusion introduces a hybrid heir and promotes
a disjointed heterogeneous family unit, which serves to unsettle
Spanish obsessions with limpieza de sangre. The nonresolution,
therefore, destabilizes ideas of cultural essentialism and calls into
question rigid sociocultural practices.45 La gran sultana projects onto
Muslim Turkey the anxieties experienced by the Spanish Counter-
Reformational subject. Cervantes’s strategy requires and compels active
participation and aims to equip the spectator to deal more astutely with
the contradictions that inform their world.46
El gallardo español is not dissimilar to La casa de los celos insofar as it
remains one of the least studied of Cervantes’s plays. It is the only
comedia to dramatize an historical event—the defence of Oran during
the Ottoman-Hapsburg struggle for control of the Mediterranean in
1563. Cervantes’s negotiation of history makes difficult the separation
of truth and fiction, as inferred by the play’s closing lines: ‘que llega el
tiempo / de dar fin a esta comedia,/cuyo principal intento/ha sido
mezclar verdades/con fabulosos intentos’ [‘The time has come to bring
an end to this play, which has intended to mix truth with imaginary
matters’].47 In fact, the line between illusion and reality is persistently
blurred in El gallardo español and the audience encounters a spectacle
that is fluid and ambiguous.
Much of the play’s insecurity is driven by the comedia’s central
character, Don Fernando de Saavedra—the gallant Spaniard. The
soldier occupies a privileged position within the hierarchical power
structures of Counter-Reformation Spain. He evinces signs of identity—
name, reputation, status, rank—which constitute the signifiers of the
normative Spanish subject. Yet in Oran, a space where the Castilian
subject exercises more limited authority, Don Fernando suffers a crisis
of identity. The drama’s paradoxical portrayal of its protagonist has
incited interest that tends to polarize the character as deserter or
hero.48 Incongruous character analyses stem from the fact that
Fernando is a renowned soldier whose reputation precedes him but
does not quite know ‘who he is’, preferring to concoct various
identities. Disguise and roleplay operate as the linchpins of the comedia.
Fernando’s motivations and conduct remain shrouded in doubt,
compelling the audience to engage in a type of guessing game, which
generates active participation with the fluctuating perspectives at play.
In Act I, Don Fernando is challenged to a fight by the Moor,
Alimuzel, and immediately decides to abandon his duty to meet the
request, despite his superior’s ominous reminder that Fernando
belongs, above all, to the king. It is at this juncture that the soldier is
conflicted between personal desire and the interests of the monarch.
His sense of individuality and being are, therefore, heavily mediated by
ideals imposed upon him by the state. Fernando is not so much a
dynamic warrior as he is a nonentity incapable of expressing himself.
In a seemingly baffling mode of behaviour, the soldier engineers his
enslavement by the Turks. In the Moorish camp he creates an alternate
identity and declares that he is merely one of Don Fernando’s fellow
soldiers. Fernando holds court impressively, constructing a back story
and engaging his audience articulately. Like many other Cervantine
creations, including El laberinto’s Julia, Don Fernando assumes an
alternative guise which permits a previously prohibited freedom and
linguistic agency. Unshackled by demands and decrees, it is ironically
within the captive space that the soldier can both assemble and restore
a sense of selfhood.
Fernando’s conduct becomes increasingly enigmatic, and at times it
appears that the soldier has decided to shift his allegiance to the
enemy. Yet at the close of the play and at the battle’s most critical
point, Don Fernando rejoins the ranks of the Christian forces and
declares forcefully his identity: ‘soy Cristiano, y quiero / mostrate que
soy cristiano’ [‘I am a Christian, and I will show you that I am a
Christian’].49 He may now have become the gallant Spaniard but his
assertion cannot eradicate the fact that the soldier’s negotiation and
restoration of identity has roots in subversive activity. Cervantes’s
problematic characterization of his protagonist makes clear that
identity is not necessarily fixed, homogeneous, or static. Rather, it is a
more volatile force that may be contested. If Cervantes’s comedia can be
said to function along ideological parameters, El gallardo raises
questions about how Spaniards might see themselves and the discourses
which inform the ‘absolute’ values of Counter-Reformation Spain. As
with La gran sultana, signifiers of identity (self and collective) are
rendered much less certain. Both Doña Catalina and Don Fernando
(individuals who have access to advantages within the Castilian state)
find themselves at odds with governing standards and their processes of
self-analysis (and negation) are convoluted and controversial.
El gallardo español is replete with complex issues beyond those
mentioned above (misrepresentation of history, racial essentialism,
etc.) but the comedia strongly evidences Cervantes’s perception of early
modern Spanish subjectivity as splintered and unstable. The unmasking
of the tensions that wage conflict within the dominant subject allow for
examination of so-called ‘centres of power’. As such, Cervantes’s stage
counteracts immutable ‘truths’ by imbuing them with a degree of
fallibility and ultimately calling into question myths peddled by the
early modern Spanish nation-state.
Los baños de Argel offers a severe depiction of captives suffering
imprisonment in Algiers and is undoubtedly the darkest of the comedias
de cautivos. The plot begins with the abduction of Spanish Christians
and follows various couples and their complicated amorous
relationships in Algiers. At the close of the drama, the Spanish captives
orchestrate their escape accompanied by the realization that the hostile
North African environment remains a cruel reality for many.
Los baños shares plotlines with both the interpolated Captive’s Tale
in Don Quixote and Cervantes’s earlier four-act El trato de Argel; works
which have dominated critical attention. The comedia portrays Muslim
captors as brutal and barbarous, particularly in their demonization of a
young boy who refuses to convert to Islam and is eventually murdered
for his resistance. Despite the fact that some of the Spanish captives
espouse an idealized perception of their homeland, Cervantes does not
hesitate to convey their own prejudices. The sexton, in particular,
expresses a malicious brand of anti-Semitism. The most striking aspect
of the play occurs in Act III, which sees the captives stage an interlude
in order to celebrate the Easter festival. The scene is significant for two
particular elements: the meta-play facilitates a more nuanced
understanding of the Cervantine dramatic aesthetic and furthers the
playwright’s vision of a turbulent Spain.
The captives staging of the interlude provides light relief from the
sinister episodes that frame it. Throughout the play, the captive is
subjected to harsh beatings, verbal abuse, and extreme denigration.
Interestingly, the Spaniards choose to stage one of Lope de Rueda’s
interludes. The choice of material not only reflects Cervantes’s homage
to his predecessor, but also relocates the offstage spectator to a time
when theatre was less commercial. The interlude, then, expresses
Cervantes’s ongoing concern with the new theatre of the 1600s, as
Cervantes ingeniously displaces Lope de Vega with Lope de Rueda.50
The scene is highly meta-theatrical in form and serves to dismantle
provocatively the illusion created by the stage. As the captives set up
their act with references to scripts, costumes, actors, and genre, the
mechanics of representation and production are played out and the
artificiality of the spectacle is reinforced. Once again, we see
Cervantes’s preoccupation with theatre that does not espouse the
comedia nueva’s ‘stage as mirror’ mantra, but rather exposes the
manipulations of the dramatic act. The actors make reference to the
‘comedia cautiva’, which plays on the very genre that Cervantes himself
created. The play within the play prioritizes word over action and,
therefore, limits the external sources that may act upon it. Thus, as
with La entretenida, a Cervantine theatre space is created that remains
far removed from the impositions of contemporary dramatic practice.
The interlude represents a distinctly Spanish space as the captives
stage a Rueda play in order to celebrate their heritage. The Spaniard
assumes centre-stage and is momentarily permitted a degree of freedom
in the midst of otherwise restrictive conditions. This is especially
evident in the character of Tristán, the sexton, who persistently
interrupts proceedings. He utilizes the opportunity to ridicule his
captor, Cauralí, a man well known for his merciless behaviour. Tristán
remains fully in control of the situation and acts out the role of buffoon
whilst simultaneously challenging his oppressor and expressing freely
his anguish. As in La entretenida, the meta-play allows for
postponement of hierarchical rank and mounts a challenge to existing
authority. Tristán’s strategy is a covert game that identifies the
Cervantine stage as one which promotes alternative perspectives. It
does not escape our notice, however, that the sexton is complicit in
racial prejudice. He is both the recipient and the perpetrator of
malevolent action. Los baños paints a desolate picture of a society
trapped in a vicious circle in which repression breeds repression.
Within the parameters of this play, restriction is not a locus in which
social or moral responsibility may thrive.
Interestingly, the actors choose to stage a pastoral colloquy. The
invocation of bucolic imagery could not contrast more starkly with the
grim prison environment. The colloquy harnesses Christian tropes and
imagery to celebrate the captives’ Christianity and the Counter-
Reformational discourses that underpin it. However, the dialogue has
no bearing on reality and promotes an empty rhetoric that might draw
the spectator into a false sense of security. The entremés is brought to a
premature end by the news that a Spanish armada has been sighted.
Nonetheless, the sighting turns out to be a hoax when it transpires that
the sun and clouds created silhouettes that formulated the perception
of an armada. The instability of the vision and the fact that the sun
(Imperial imagery) constructs the mirage brutally dismantles any
impending Spanish glory. The play within the play could not end on a
darker note: the captives remain incarcerated and the costly mistake of
investing in illusion is accentuated in the harshest of ways. Los baños de
Argel, therefore, issues stark warnings for an audience susceptible to
misrepresentation and encourages discriminating scrutiny of wider
concerns at stake.
The comedias de cautivos dialogue compellingly with the decline of
early modern Spain and the conflicts engaging the seventeenth-century
Spanish subject. El gallardo español, La gran sultana, and Los baños de
Argel project a distinctly pessimistic picture and are much more brutal
than scholarship has previously allowed.51 The comedias, however,
employ a number of strategies (often meta-dramatic) that provoke
active scrutiny and incite the audience to engage more perceptively
with their world. Cervantes, therefore, develops his drama as a ‘form of
liberation rather than a tool of repression’.52 Each comedia grants a
voice to the oppressed subject, and Cervantes utilizes this dissident
repositioning of the peripheral to destabilize the prevailing world view
and the messages proliferated by the corral. Viewed from this
perspective, Cervantes’s theatre proffers a renewing vision, as indicated
by Alcalá Galán.53 His alternative stage promises not to exploit but to
unfetter the spectator from the grave pitfall of critical insensitivity.
El rufián dichoso; Pedro de Urdemalas
El rufián dichoso and Pedro de Urdemalas have not conventionally been
connected by scholarship. The former is considered a comedia de santos
[saint’s play] whilst Pedro is often perceived as a pseudo-picaresque
drama. Nevertheless, both plays feature wily protagonists who live on
the social margins and utilize roleplay as a means to effect change. In
fact, Cervantes’s characters may be identified as a type of pícaro who
view life as a series of performances.54 For Lugo (El rufián) and Pedro,
life becomes a stage on which they produce illusions for their onstage
audiences. However, the artists exploit the theatre in a dissimilar
fashion. El rufián dichoso and Pedro de Urdemalas are, therefore, highly
self-conscious comedias that underscore Cervantes’s perception of
dramatic art, with much to say about the mediations of the stage itself.
El rufián dichoso ostensibly takes the form of a comedia de santos; a
Cervantine anomaly which has attracted considerable attention. The
play features a rogue whose dissolute lifestyle is well documented in
the opening Act. The delinquent experiences a religious conversion and
decides to commit his life to God, a transformation played out during
the remainder of the play. Criticism generally upholds that the volte-
face is genuine and that Lugo authentically converts from sinner to
saint. There are a few dissenting voices, however, which argue that the
spiritual experience is merely an illusion fabricated by Cervantes’s
protagonist.55 The drama sustains enough evidence to corroborate such
an opinion, not least in its engagement with the picaresque genre,
which signposts the non-redemption of the protagonist.56
Lugo’s antisocial conduct can be likened to the archetypal pícaro,
whose behaviour stems from the stigma of his destitute background.
Lugo is motivated to escape his past and forge an identity that ensures
he does not live under the shadow of his employer and his father. The
rogue is not driven by social or economic mobility but by desire for
fame. In other words, he determines that his personal worth and value
should be recognized by others.57 The audience, therefore, encounters
another Cervantine creation suffering a crisis of identity and an acute
sense of displacement.
The crux of the play occurs toward the end of Act I when Lugo
participates in a card game and vows to become a religious man if he
wins. Cervantes’s protagonist, however, triumphs by cheating and
follows through with his promise independently. Questions of free will
and the freedom of the individual pervade the scene, issues which
reached fever pitch during the Catholic Counter-Reformation. For Lugo,
the card game is an extension of his autonomy and signifies his ability
to fashion himself however he chooses. He is not prepared to indulge
the notion of life as a gamble but prefers to manoeuvre his own
destiny.
Lugo exchanges social disorder for a role that appears honourable
and which will bring him deference. As an actor, the trickster has
access to tools of the trade—such as skilful communication—which
facilitate a convincing performance.58 Lugo utilizes a successful
linguistic strategy, which replaces his delinquency with rhetoric that
constructs religious conviction. In his new abode—Mexico—Lugo
adopts the name of Cruz, a name laden with religious overtones. It is in
Act II that his duplicitous conversion is especially highlighted. Cruz
exchanges his good works for the sins of Doña Ana to ensure her entry
into Heaven—a transaction which earns him much recognition.
Notwithstanding the fact that the audience has not witnessed any such
good deeds, Cruz’s speech at the time of absolution deploys false
modesty and humility as a pretext for self-promotion.59 In full, the
scene demonstrates how language ably creates and exploits perspective.
Crucially, it is the only episode in which Cervantes depicts his
protagonist’s sacred self. Rhetoric and reality are at odds as Cruz abuses
modes of communication and his position of religious authority. The
trickster’s display of religion merely cloaks a self-centred individual
who orchestrates controlled hoaxes in order to attain power and
control.
The conversation between Comedia and Curiosidad at the beginning
of Act II contributes to the impression of Lugo’s metamorphosis by
communicating to the audience the events that have occurred between
Acts I and II. The dialogue fills a temporal space and underscores the
fact that much of El rufián’s action is created by what is said. Cervantes
deploys this device throughout his comedia in order to highlight the
capacity of the stage to wield control over audience response and
represent illusion as though it constituted something credible.
Cervantes’s ruffian functions as a meta-theatrical device through
which the apparatus of the stage is laid bare. Theatre is revealed as a
powerful and highly artificial structure, which can toy with realities
and manipulate strategies (in this case, language) to mislead and
deceive. The comedia deconstructs theatre as we witness the processes
with which Lugo exploits a counterfeit character. The play’s subject is,
of course, highly sensitive and a degree of ambivalence pervades El
rufián dichoso. Nevertheless, Cervantes’s comedia de santos suggests that
fraudulent realities demand radical questioning and inquiry.
In his last play published in the collection, Pedro de Urdemalas,
Cervantes fashions a comic and self-conscious drama that has received
critical approval and found success on the contemporary stage.60
Cervantes took inspiration from Spanish folklore in his interpretation of
the stock picaresque figure, Pedro de Urdemalas. Cervantes’s
protagonist is both a sharp-witted trickster who easily outmanoeuvres
others and a seductive, gallant character who utilizes his capabilities
for the benefit of others. The play is set in a rural environment, which
does little to mask the bitter undertones that expose weak political and
legislative structures as well as social unease and crisis. At times, Pedro
de Urdemalas exudes a biting tone that invites the audience to laugh at
—and question—the systems which govern their world.
Cervantes’s 
ingenious 
protagonist, 
Pedro, 
is 
the 
comedia’s
masterpiece. He is a consummate role-player and a skilful protean
figure who adapts rapidly to the circumstances in which he finds and
places himself. Cervantes’s play is driven by complex meta-theatrical
devices, which position Pedro as author and dramatist.61 Although the
world is quite literally his stage, Pedro remains a ‘son of his works…a
free and an independent person’.62 In fact, Pedro is wholly unaffected
by authority or those who would try to impose upon him his place in
the world. He is the antithesis of countless Golden Age theatrical
characters who fret over their relationship with prevailing standards
and attempt to modify it. McKendrick aptly labels Pedro the ‘ultimate
self-fashioner…free and in control of himself and his life’.63 Cervantes’s
Proteus, therefore, only superficially embodies mobility and change.
Whilst the play’s secondary characters find themselves at odds with
their environment, Pedro projects a distinct lack of conflict and
antagonism.
The play derives its dramatic power from Pedro’s radical and
nonconformist outlook and perception of freedom.64 His beliefs are
anchored in an unorthodox background, which facilitated Pedro’s
ability to fashion himself self-consciously into the person of his own
choice. He embodies freedom as a way of life and comes to the rescue
of those who are denied the right to exercise free will. For instance, the
benevolent trickster intervenes in the lives of two women, Belica and
Clemencia, in order to facilitate their personal goals and resist the
impositions of others. Pedro, therefore, stands in sharp contrast to
conventional patriarchal structures and diktats.
The most striking feature of Cervantes’s chameleon protagonist is his
heightened appreciation of his art. Pedro is fully aware that his roles
equate to illusory guises, which he adopts for a moment in time.
Throughout the play, Pedro remains detached from fantasy and is never
in danger of being deceived. His ability to maintain distance from his
performances not only displays a confident individuality but also
reveals an astute understanding of the stage as an ephemeral and
transitory structure. Unlike El rufián’s Lugo, Pedro does not exploit the
stage indefinitely nor wilfully orchestrate highly dangerous hoaxes.
It is entirely appropriate that at the last Pedro becomes a
professional actor and, therefore, finds a way to sustain permanently
his metamorphoses. He is an unconventionally stable protagonist
cognizant of his role as a performer and within society itself. Cervantes,
therefore, responds to the mutable world of the Baroque and allows the
subject—and his perverse notions of freedom—to reign supreme. Pedro
not only challenges the environment of appearances and external
conformity in which he lives but embodies a very significant model of
theatre. His dramatic art renders illusion as illusion and highlights the
artifice upon which the stage is fabricated. The drama’s final lines fire a
parting shot at the spectator who would invest in the comedia as though
it constituted something wholly credible: ‘Mañana, en el teatro, se hará
una…/y verán que no acaba en casamiento,/cosa común y vista cien
mil veces’ [‘Tomorrow a play will be staged in the theatre…that doesn’t
end in marriage as is usual and seen a hundred thousand times
before’].65 Pedro de Urdemalas represents Cervantes’s greatest challenge
to contemporary drama and, in fact, is reminiscent of the Cervantine
stage itself: a counter-reaction to established dramatic and ontological
‘realities’.
In El rufián dichoso and Pedro de Urdemalas, Cervantes stages two
autonomous individuals who resist the control of external pressures and
fashion themselves in accordance to their own predetermined
standards. The outworking of such determination evidently results in
two very distinct modus operandi. Nevertheless, both protagonists
harness inner will and strength to withstand and subdue the
conventions to which others so readily accede. In line with Cervantes’s
other comedias, El rufián and Pedro recognize perceptive engagement
and free will as antidotes to the oppression experienced by the early
modern Spanish subject. As with La casa de los celos, the comedias
observe the aptitude of the stage and dialogue with the antagonism
between illusion (parecer) and reality (ser). The destabilization of the
apparatus that generates the artifice is designed to rouse insightful
discrimination toward the workings of the stage and the wider contexts
in which it operates.
Cervantes’s Ocho comedias represent a body of work that ought not
to be judged by the standards and conventions of the Lopean stage but
has profited paradoxically from the dramatist’s antagonistic attitude
toward contemporary theatrical practice. The playwright’s unease with
the comedia nueva gave birth to a theatre that aimed to transcend
existing trends and forge an outlet for an unorthodox artistic vision.
Despite the fact that there was little hope of competing with the Lopean
model, Cervantes fashioned his stage with resilience and drive without
resorting to resentful or vindictive approaches. Rather, the dramatist
creatively constructs a highly self-reflexive and challenging drama that
communicates his distinct, and dissident, conception of the stage. As a
writer committed to plurality of perspective, Cervantes induces the
audience to consider actively the nuances of his comedias and discern
their aesthetic concerns, and the implications of these within the
broader context. In spite of any perceived ‘failure’, it is evident that
Cervantes understood comprehensively the workings of the stage.66 His
comedias demonstrate astute awareness of the producer/consumer
dynamic, as well as plot, action, and language, and their symbiotic
relationship within the dramatic arena. Above all, Cervantes recognizes
the ideological dimension of theatre and his dramatic craft deals
expressly with the far-reaching potential of manipulation of such a
public forum.
The comedias, however, are by no means an iconoclastic art form
that ruptures with the classical traditions of the past. Rooted in
Horatian aesthetics, the eight plays formulate a stage that both
entertains and instructs.67 The didactic function of the Cervantine stage
reveals a bold attempt to create a spectator who will comprehend and
appreciate the dramatist’s agenda. Such a project may be very
ambitious, but it portrays a playwright who retains confidence in his
work and is driven by a desire for an audience that shares his vision.
Cervantes prioritizes notions of reception and his dramatic strategies
reveal a writer very much in tune with the influential relationship
between the stage and its public. As outlined by the brief readings of
the comedias in this chapter, Cervantes often dialogues with sombre and
profoundly weighty issues, which are balanced by moments of comic
relief, always delivered by a master hand adept at striking the right
note between humour, empathy, and pathos. Undoubtedly, Cervantes’s
drama exhibits a sharp awareness of the travails of the human
condition as well as its flaws and foibles. At the heart of the comedias
lies a deep preoccupation with human nature and its many facets;
particularly the tensions that lie within—and without—the individual.
Art and life are connected meaningfully in the Cervantine dramatic
imagination as the playwright engages his audience compellingly,
persistently challenging their view of the world.
The Cervantine stage is resolutely anti-propagandistic in its forceful
resistance to the ideological infrastructure of early modern Spain. It is
designed to provoke a discerning reaction and, therefore, does place
substantial demands on an audience’s sensibilities. However, this is a
stage rooted in its own time and place and should not be labelled
radical by our own standards. Cervantes does not misuse his art in
order to promote disregard for societal standards or upheaval of the
system. Rather, his drama represents the oppositions and tensions
inherent within sociocultural/political practices and constrains the
audience to consider judiciously their environment and the messages
transmitted by powerful fora. Ultimately, Cervantes’s theatre signifies
an innovative aesthetic written on the margins of mainstream theatre
and propelled by a craftsman captivated by the paradoxes of his world
and the ability of the dramatic imagination to realize and dialogue
powerfully with these.
Works Cited
Alcalá Galán, Mercedes. ‘“Dios te dé salud y a mí paciencia”: Teoría del teatro
en Cervantes’. In La media semana del jardincito: Cervantes y la reescritura de los
códigos, edited by José María Manuel Morán (Padova: Unipress, 2002), pp.
255–75.
Allen, John J. ‘Some aspects of the staging of Cervantes’s play’. Crítica Hispánica
11 (1989): pp. 7–16.
Anderson, Ellen M. ‘Refashioning the Maze: The Interplay of Gender and Rank
in Cervantes’s El laberinto de amor’. Bulletin of the Comediantes 46, no. 2
(1994): pp. 165–85.
Arboleda, Carlos Arturo. Teoría y Formas del metateatro en Cervantes (Salamanca:
Universidad de Salamanca, 1991).
Arias Careaga, Raquel. ‘Pedro de Urdemalas: Otro ejemplo de libertad
Cervantina’. Annali di Ca’ Foscari: Rivista della Facoltà di Lingue e Letterature
Straniere dell’Università di Venezia 31, nos. 1–2 (1992): pp. 43–59.
Blanco Aguinaga, Carlos. ‘Cervantes y la picaresca: Notas sobre dos tipos de
realismo’. Nueva Revista de Filología Hispánica 11, no. 2 (1957): pp. 313–42.
Buchanan, M. A. ‘The works of Cervantes and their dates of composition’.
Transactions of the Royal Society of Canada 32 (1938): pp. 23–39.
Canavaggio, Jean. Cervantès dramaturge: un théâtre à naître (Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France, 1977).
Casalduero, Joaquín. Sentido y forma del teatro de Cervantes (Madrid: Aguilar,
1951).
Castillo, David R. (A)Wry Views: Anamorphosis, Cervantes, and the Early
Picaresque (Indiana: Purdue University Press, 2001).
Castillo, Moisés. ‘Ortodoxia Cervantina? Un análisis de La gran sultana, El trato
de Argel, y Los baños de Argel’. Bulletin of the Comediantes 56, no. 2 (2004): pp.
219–40.
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Comedias y Entremeses, edited by Rodolfo
Schevill and Adolfo Bonilla (Madrid: Impr. de B. Rodríguez, 1915–22).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Poesías Completas, I. Viaje del Parnaso y Adjunta
al Parnaso, edited by Vicente Gaos (Madrid: Castalia, 1973).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Teatro Completo, edited by Florencio Sevilla
Arroyo and Antonio Rey Hazas (Barcelona: Planeta, 1987).
Childers, William. ‘“Ese Tan Borrado Sobrescrito”: The Deconstruction of Lope’s
Religious Theater in El retablo de las maravillas and El rufián dichoso’. Bulletin
of the Comediantes 56, no. 2 (2004): pp. 241–69.
Cotarelo y Valledor, Armando. El teatro de Cervantes (Madrid: Revista de
Archivos, Bibliotecas y Museos, 1915).
Cruz, Anne. ‘Deceit, Desire, and the Limits of Subversion in Cervantes’s
Interludes’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 14, no. 2
(1994): pp. 119–36.
Díez Borque, José María. ‘La historia del teatro según Cervantes’. In Cervantes y
la puesta en escena de la sociedad de su tiempo, edited by Catherine Poupeney
Hart, Alfredo Hermenegildo, and César Oliva (Murcia: Universidad de Murcia,
1999), pp. 17–53.
Dunn, Peter N. ‘Cervantes De/Re-Constructs the Picaresque’. Cervantes: Bulletin
of the Cervantes Society of America 2, no. 2 (1982): pp. 109–31.
Friedman, Edward. ‘An Archetype and its modifications: Cervantes’s dramatic
theory and practice’. The American Hispanist 15 (1978): pp. 9–11.
Friedman, Edward. The Unifying Concept: Approaches to the Structure of
Cervantes’s Comedias (South Carolina: Spanish Literature Publications
Company, 1981).
Fuchs, Barbara. Passing for Spain: Cervantes and the Fictions of Identity (Chicago:
University of Illinois Press, 2003).
González, Aurelio. ‘Dramaturgia Barroca en las comedias de Cervantes’. Olivar
1, no. 1 (2000): pp. 83–102.
Henry, Melanie. ‘Cervantine Theater as Counter-Perspective Aesthetic:
Reconsidering El rufián dichoso’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of
America 31, no. 2 (2011): pp. 105–24.
Henry, Melanie. ‘Playing Lope in Cervantes’s Los baños de Argel’. In Artifice and
Invention in the Spanish Golden Age, edited by Terry O’Reilly and Stephen Boyd
(Oxford: Legenda, 2014), pp. 116–25.
Henry, Melanie. The Signifying Self: Cervantine Drama as Counter-Perspective
Aesthetic (London: MHRA, 2013).
Hughes, Gethin. ‘El gallardo español: A Case of Misplaced Honour’. Cervantes:
Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 13, no. 1 (1993): pp. 65–75.
Johnson, Carroll B. ‘El arte viejo de hacer teatro: Lope de Rueda, Lope de Vega,
y Cervantes’. Cuadernos de Filología 3, nos. 1–2 (1981): pp. 247–59.
López Alfonso, Francisco José. ‘La entretenida, parodia y teatralidad’. Anales
Cervantinos 24 (1986): pp. 193–205.
Maestro, Jesús G. ‘El triunfo de la heterodoxia. El teatro de Cervantes y la
literatura europea’. Theatralia: Revista de Teoría del Teatro 5 (2003): pp. 19–
48.
Maestro, Jesús G. La escena imaginaria: poética del teatro de Miguel de Cervantes
(Madrid; Frankfurt: Iberoamericana-Vervuert, 2000).
Maravall, José Antonio. Culture of the Baroque: Analysis of a Historical Structure
(Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1986).
Mariscal, George. Contradictory Subjects: Quevedo, Cervantes and Seventeenth-
Century Spanish Culture (Ithaca; London: Cornell University Press, 1991).
Mariscal, George. ‘Woman and Other Metaphors in Cervantes’s Comedia famosa
de La entretenida’. Theatre Journal 46, no. 2 (1994): pp. 213–30.
McKendrick, Melveena. ‘Writings for the stage’. In The Cambridge Companion to
Cervantes, edited by Anthony J. Cascardi (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2002), pp. 131–59.
Pedraza Jiménez, Felipe B. ‘El teatro mayor de Cervantes: Comentarios a
contrapelo’. In Actas del VII coloquio internacional de la Asociación de
Cervantistas, edited by José Ramón Fernández de Cano y Martín (El Toboso:
Ayuntamiento de El Toboso, 1999), pp. 19–38.
Reed, Cory A. ‘Cervantes and the Novelization of Drama: Tradition and
Innovation in the Entremeses’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of
America 11, no. 1 (1991): pp. 61–86.
Rey Hazas, Antonio. ‘Las comedias de cautivos de Cervantes’. In Los imperios
orientales en el teatro del Siglo de Oro, Actas de XVI Jornadas de Teatro Clásico,
Almagro Julio de 1993, edited by Felipe B. Pedraza Jiménez and Rafael
González Cañal (Almagro: Universidad Castilla-La Mancha y Festival de
Almagro, 1994), pp. 29–56.
Rey Hazas, Antonio. Poética de la libertad y otras claves cervantinas (Madrid:
Ediciones Eneida, 2005).
Robbins, Jeremy. The Challenges of Uncertainty: An Introduction to Seventeenth-
Century Spanish Literature (London: Duckworth, 1998).
Rosales, Luis. Cervantes y la Libertad, 2 vols. (Madrid: Instituto de Cooperación
Iberoamericana, 1985).
Ruiz Pérez, Pedro. ‘Dramaturgia, teatralidad y sentido en La casa de los celos’. In
Actas del II Coloquio de la Asociación de Cervantistas (Alcalá de Henares, 6–9 de
noviembre de 1989), (Barcelona: Anthropos, 1991), pp. 657–72.
Spadaccini, Nicholas. ‘Cervantes and the Spanish comedia’. In Ideologies and
Literature. Plays and Playhouses in Imperial Decadence, edited by Anthony
Zahareas (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1985), pp. 53–67.
Spadaccini, Nicholas and Jenaro Talens. Through the Shattering Glass: Cervantes
and the Self-Made World (London; Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
1993).
Stapp, William A. ‘Dichoso por confiado’. Anales Cervantinos 25 (1987): pp.
413–52.
Syverson-Stork, Jill. Theatrical Aspects of the Novel: A Study of Don Quixote
(Valencia: Albatros, 1986).
Taddeo, Sara. ‘De vox extremada: Cervantes’s women characters speak for
themselves’. In Women in the Discourse of Early Modern Spain, edited by Joan
F. Cammarata (Gainesville, Florida: University Press of Florida, 2003), pp.
183–98.
Talens, Jenaro, ‘Narrating Theatricality’. In Ideologies and Literature. Plays and
Playhouses in Imperial Decadence, edited by Anthony Zahareas (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 1985), pp. 87–101.
Thacker, Jonathan. A Companion to Golden-Age Theatre (Woodbridge: Tamesis,
2007).
Trambaioli, Marcella. ‘Una protocomedia burlesca de Cervantes: La casa de los
celos, parodia de algunas piezas del primer Lope de Vega’. In Cervantes y su
mundo, vol. 1, edited by Eva Reichenberger and Kurt Reichenberger (Kassel:
Reichenberger, 2004), pp. 407–38.
Valbuena Prat, Ángel. ‘Las Ocho comedias de Cervantes’. In Homenaje a
Cervantes, edited by Francisco Sánchez-Castañer (Valencia: Mediterráneo,
1950), pp. 257–66.
Vega, Lope de. Arte nuevo de hacer comedias en este tiempo, edited by Juana de
José Prades (Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, 1971).
Wardropper, Bruce. ‘Cervantes’ Theory of the Drama’. Modern Philology 52, no.
4 (1955): pp. 217–21.
Wardropper, Bruce. ‘Comedias’. In Suma cervantina, edited by J. B. Avalle-Arce
and E. C. Riley (London: Tamesis, 1973), pp. 147–69.
Weimar, Christopher B. ‘Going to extremes: Barthes, Lacan, and Cervantes’ La
gran sultana’. In Gender, Identity and Representation in Spain’s Golden Age,
edited by Anita K. Stoll and Dawn L. Smith (Lewisburg: Bucknell University
Press, 2000), pp. 47–60.
Zimic, Stanislav. ‘Cervantes frente a Lope y a la comedia nueva: Observaciones
sobre La entretenida’. Anales Cervantinos 15 (1976): pp. 19–119.
Zimic, Stanislav. ‘El gran teatro del mundo y el gran mundo del teatro en Pedro
de Urdemalas de Cervantes’. Acta Neophilologica 10 (1977): pp. 55–105.
Zimic, Stanislav. El teatro de Cervantes (Madrid: Castalia, 1992).
Zimic, Stanislav. ‘Sobre el arte dramático de Cervantes en El rufián dichoso’. In
Cervantes 1547–1997: Jornadas de Investigación Cervantina, edited by Aurelio
González (Mexico: Colegio de México, Fondo Eulalio Ferrer, 1999), pp. 87–
101.
Zimic, Stanislav. ‘Sobre la técnica dramática de Cervantes en El gallardo
español’. Boletín de la Real Academia Española 54 (1974): pp. 505–18.
1 Díez Borque, p. 18.
2 Cervantes, Teatro completo, p. 7; Thacker observes that Cervantes, amongst
others, nostalgically misrepresented Rueda’s dramatic achievements, p. 124.
3 Thacker, p. 57.
4 See Chapter 24 for a study of Cervantes and Lope de Vega.
5 See Chapter 18 of this Handbook for a fuller exposition of Cervantes’s
position on the new style of drama. Cervantes’s lament about the
commercialization of theatre is well expressed in Don Quixote, I.48. Lope’s Arte
nuevo asserts that the new theatre is driven by the demands of the vulgo
[masses].
6 Spadaccini, p. 55.
7 Reed, p. 68.
8 Zimic, El teatro…, p. 16.
9 See Reed, p. 69; Zimic, El teatro…, pp. 402–3; McKendrick, p. 132. On
occasions scholarship has over-stretched the idea of Cervantes’s experimental
approach. His theatre may not fit the conventional Golden Age mould, but it is
not always as ahead of its time as some critics would contend.
10 For instance, the Bulletin of the Comediantes dedicated volume 56, no. 2
(2004) to Cervantes’s stage. Cervantine dramatic studies are often limited to
conference contributions.
11 McKendrick, p. 132.
12 Weimar, p. 48.
13 Henry, The Signifying Self, p. 5.
14 Maestro, ‘El triunfo…’, p. 20; see also Alcalá Galán.
15 Syverson-Stork, p. 9; the scholar contends that Cervantes’s efforts in this
regard contributed to his failure as a dramatist.
16 See Robbins for further discussion of the early modern Baroque
environment in which Cervantes and other writers of the time conceived their
works.
17 Spadaccini and Talens, p. xii.
18 Cruz, p. 122; this statement, made in connection with the entremeses, is
just as readily applied to the Ocho comedias.
19 See Maravall’s thesis, which views the comedia as a type of mechanism of
control that served the interests of the Castilian state. It is worth noting that
Maravall’s ideas have been significantly challenged since the publication of his
work in 1972. Scholarship in more recent years has drawn attention to the
pitfalls of assuming a monolithic and homogenous audience.
20 For further discussion of the strategies which Cervantes employs to create
and educate a spectator who will understand the tenets of his alternative
theatre, see Henry, The Signifying Self, pp. 110–11.
21 For example, see Henry, The Signifying Self and Rey Hazas, Poética…
22 Mariscal, Contradictory Subjects. The complexities of the Baroque epoch
require more extensive consideration than the constraints of this chapter allow.
23 Rosales observes that freedom serves as the very axis of the Cervantine
artistic endeavour, p. 33.
24 Rey Hazas, Poética…
25 McKendrick, p. 136.
26 See Cervantès dramaturge.
27 According to Arboleda, Cervantes rejects the manipulation and use of the
theatre as a propaganda vehicle for ideas and myths such as love, honour, and
the monarchy. Alternatively, the dramatist insists on artistic integrity and rigour
(p. 84).
28 Friedman’s monograph, The Unifying Concept, makes a strong case for a
coherent dramatic aesthetic.
29 It is, therefore, not feasible to accommodate all of these critical responses
within this chapter.
30 Examination of the plays in this chapter is driven primarily by interest in
issues of identity, selfhood, and freedom, concerns identified by the author as
fundamental to an understanding of Cervantes’s drama.
31 For example, see Zimic, ‘Cervantes frente…’ and López Alfonso.
32 On this topic, see Mariscal, ‘Woman and Other Metaphors’.
33 I. 81–2.
34 III. 2790.
35 For further exploration of these strategies, see Taddeo and Anderson.
36 Castillo, David R., p. 117.
37 Trambaioli, p. 411.
38 Ruiz Pérez, p. 666.
39 See Fuchs.
40 Fuchs, p. 86.
41 La gran sultana was staged by the Compañía Nacional de Teatro Clásico
[National Classical Theatre Company] in 1992. It was also staged in Istanbul in
2010.
42 Pedraza Jiménez, pp. 28–9.
43 Zimic, El teatro…, pp. 183–4.
44 II. 1318–19.
45 Castillo, Moisés, p. 220.
46 Cervantes employs a similar strategy in the exemplary novel, La española
inglesa, in which his portrayal of England functions as a smokescreen for a
critique of Spain.
47 III. 3130–4.
48 Canavaggio, p. 393; Hughes, p. 68.
49 III. 2778–81.
50 Henry, ‘Playing Lope…’, pp. 116–18.
51 Rey Hazas, for example, contends that Cervantes paints a positive picture
of the Spaniard in the captivity plays (‘Las comedias de cautivos…’, p. 36).
52 Spadaccini, p. 66.
53 Alcalá Galán, p. 269. See also Henry, The Signifying Self, p. 63.
54 Cervantes’s relationship with the picaresque is not, however,
uncontentious. For further exploration of this uneasy correlation, see Blanco
Aguinaga and Dunn.
55 Stapp, p. 431; Childers, p. 251.
56 Henry, The Signifying Self, pp. 129–39.
57 Zimic, ‘Sobre el arte dramático…’, p. 88.
58 Childers, p. 254. Henry, ‘Cervantine Theater…’, p. 108.
59 II. 2115–39.
60 The play has been staged in Spain on various occasions. The Royal
Shakespeare Company presented an English verse translation in 2004 under the
title of Peter, the Great Pretender.
61 See Zimic, ‘El gran teatro…’ for consideration of the comedia’s
metadramatic dimension.
62 Rey Hazas, Poética…, p. 305.
63 McKendrick, p. 149.
64 See Arias Careaga, p. 43.
65 III. 3166, 3169–70; Pedro may be referring to the play that the offstage
audience have just watched, Pedro de Urdemalas, or perhaps to Cervantes’s La
entretenida.
66 Cervantes has often been accused of novelizing his writings for the stage.
Zimic considers Cervantes’s penchant for the novelistic as a contributing factor
toward the failure of his dramatic endeavours: ‘Sobre la técnica dramática’. It is
ironic that critics have denounced the presence of narrative/novelistic strategies
in Cervantes’s theatre yet have been quick to emphasize the theatricality of his
prose; see González.
67 Henry, The Signifying Self, p. 57. This combination of ‘delectare et docere’
underpins the Novelas ejemplares, as the author himself explains in the prologue
to the collection. Cervantes, the dramatist, was influenced not only by Horace
but also by the poetics and ideas espoused by Plato and Aristotle, amongst
others.
Chapter 17
The Ignominies of Persuasion in
Cervantes’s Entremeses (1615)
An Overview of Cervantine Farce
Carolyn Lukens-Olson
Saint Michael’s College, Vermont
Introduction
With his finely wrought entremeses, farces that figure among ‘the most
beguiling things’ he ever wrote, as Edwin Honig1 describes them,
Cervantes brought life and relevancy back to a tired, outmoded, and ill-
regarded genre of Spanish theatre. In fact, Cervantes stands as a
luminary of early modern Spanish theatre thanks to these dramatic
interludes, which are brilliant, though simple in design, and grand,
though few in number and brief in length. There are only eight
entremeses collected in Cervantes’s Ocho comedias, y ocho entremeses,
nunca representados and a handful of attributions, one of which, Los
habladores, is discussed here.2 Turning his attention to the well-worn
entremés, Cervantes gave the least-esteemed genre of Spanish theatre a
much-needed revitalization by updating its themes, expanding its
repertoire of characters, and deepening its considerations of human
nature. In fact, Cervantes’s interludes are as imaginative, ironic, funny,
and modern as his Don Quixote and perhaps written during the same
period.3 Nevertheless, that Cervantes would be a key figure in Spanish
literature without Don Quixote comes as a surprise to many. A further
surprise is Cervantes’s attraction to the entremés, the humblest of
dramatic genres in every way.
The entremés before Cervantes
The Spanish entremés—from the French entremet—is a brief farce aimed
at entertaining an audience between the acts of a serious, full-length
play, just as culinary entremeses are served between the principal
courses of a banquet. The use of the term has fluctuated; in the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, entremés was used freely to refer to
various forms of entertainment, not always limited to farce or even
theatre, and later used by Juan de Timoneda as an alternative for paso.
Lope de Rueda, the father of the Spanish entremés, was the first to
distinguish it from the paso, which was derived from Biblical
performances. Lope de Rueda’s entremeses set the stylistic parameters
for the next few decades, and by the end of the sixteenth century, the
entremés as a genre was codified.
The entremés is characterized by its limitations: the staging is simple,
the length is minimal—covering one act—and the mode, popular. With
few exceptions, the characters are unsophisticated, if clever, and
usually associated with rural life in all manners of attitude, action, and
speech. The humour and interest of the entremés come from the antics
and language of the mostly stock characters who rarely venture beyond
well-known views, transcribed modes, and predictable actions, all
within the parameters of the genre. A closer review of the features of
the entremés before Cervantes—beginning with a consideration of
staging and ending with a look at characters and themes—will provide
a context in which to understand his innovations more fully.
As a one-act representation outside the dramatic space of the full-
length play in which it is embedded, the entremés is hurriedly
assembled. Accordingly, the props, scenery, and costumes are kept to a
minimum. All is stylized, with select details, for example, establishing
the gender, age, and profession of the characters: a white beard
signifies an old man, a tattered uniform, a soldier, and so on. Evolved
as it was from travelling theatre with few actors (all of whom were
required to play multiple parts) and mobile sets, the entremés does not
stray much from its roots as far as staging is concerned. These are the
features of the entremés that Cervantes notes in the prologue to his Ocho
comedias, y ocho entremeses, nuevos, where he comments that all the
props, mostly beards and wigs, of theatre director Lope de Rueda could
fit into one sack and that the set consisted of little more than a hanging
blanket. In the same text, Cervantes describes later stage developments
associated with the Spanish comedia. Such developments, however, are
not seen in the entremés, which continues to rely primarily and
humorously on the spectator’s active imagination, a feature appropriate
to the genre and one undoubtedly attractive to Cervantes.
Character and action in these entremeses are shaped also by the strict
limitations of time, with little room for development of either. Thus,
stock characters and their well-known ways are used and reused. In this
regard and others, Spanish entremeses share something with the
sixteenth-century Italian commedia dell’arte, whose characters, in
accordance with their fixed comic parts—the rich old merchant, the
saucy servant, and the boastful soldier, among others—speak and act
strictly in character, making use of their ample reserves of tricks, topoi,
and memorized jokes. Spanish entremeses are similarly populated by
stock characters with their perennial peccadilloes, such as the jealous
old man, the miserly petits-bourgeois, the officious sacristan, the
braggart soldier, the scheming student, and the ignorant alderman.
Spectators knew what to expect when these characters, many of whom
come from the familiar public spectacles of carnival, made their
appearances.
No small amount of the humour of these entremeses comes from the
language of the characters. Unlike the rhymed verse of the comedias,
entremeses are written in prose, allowing for some flexibility and
spontaneity from actors, such as in the commedia dell’arte. Furthermore,
the language of these entremeses is unsophisticated by design, the lines
of the country folk written mostly in what is called rústico, or sayagües,
in its features much like the language of Bottom and the other ‘hempen
homespuns’ in Midsummer’s Night Dream. Sayagües is marked by the
widespread use of proverbs, frequent expressions of folk wisdom, and
an abundance of highly inventive euphemistic expressions that are used
to sidestep sacrilege. Archaic words, verb forms, and constructions are
also common, reflecting the slow evolution of language in nonurban
areas. Add to this mix distortions and misuse of Latin words and
phrases as well as linguistic deformations, including misspoken vowels
and inverted adjacent consonants, such as pelra instead of perla.4 In
sum, all that points to a lack of urbanity and education seems to make
its way into sayagües, especially in circumstances requiring more
precise language than that which the characters are able to muster, and
therein lies much of the immediate humour of the entremeses. As the
alderman Benito says in El retablo de las maravillas, ‘Siempre quiero
decir lo que es mejor, sino que las más veces no acierto’ [‘I always
mean to say what’s right but most times get it wrong’].5
The entremeses from the second-half of the sixteenth century are
humorous works that poke fun primarily at country folk and a handful
of often-targeted professions, including lawyers, sacristans, and
servants. The farces by convention end with mock floggings or other
forms of entertaining reckonings as public atonement for the deeds of
the characters. Furthermore, current events and local scandals were
brought into play. Moreover, though these entremeses were in demand
—no full-length play was shown without them—at that time they were
not sources of pride for their authors, who sold or distributed them
anonymously. In his prologue to the Novelas ejemplares, Cervantes
writes that his may be found among works that ‘andan por ahí
descarriadas, y quizá, sin el nombre de su dueño.’ [‘have gone astray,
maybe without their author’s name’].6 Some of those were undoubtedly
entremeses.
Cervantes’s innovations
Working well within the generic confines of the entremés, Cervantes
nevertheless managed to improve them, implementing a few key
innovations that had considerable impact. Eugenio Asensio describes
three areas of innovation: language, characters, and resolution, all
examined here, beginning with Cervantes’s changes in the language of
the entremés.7 With language being most everything in these plays,
Cervantes’s innovations of this kind have several dimensions.
Language
The first dimension regarding language is that of style; Cervantes made
the move from prose to full verse in two interludes, La elección de los
alcaldes de Daganzo and El rufián viudo llamado Trampagos, writing them
either in endecasílabos sueltos, eleven-syllable unrhymed verses, or
alternatively, in heptasílabos sueltos, seven-syllable unrhymed verses.
Elsewhere, Cervantes incorporated a wide variety of verse types and
genres of poetry, namely octosílabos, redondillas, cantares, quintillas,
canciones, romances, and romancillos. This formal leap, apart from
beautifying the language with cadence and rhyme, also assured
precision since the tight syllabic schemes left little chance for
improvisation on behalf of the actors. Furthermore, poetic verse in the
mouths of the characters of the entremeses creates the occasion for
much humour. Consider those of the pimp Trámpagos at the funeral of
his favourite girl, where he describes how golden her locks of hair were
(so well tinted from silver), how well she was loved by him (and by the
whole town council), and in what state she left this world (with no way
of knowing where she ended up). Bad verse is as revealing of character
as good verse, not to mention funny.
The broad rhetorical background of Cervantes’s entremeses is the
second dimension related to language. On the one hand, Alonso López
Pinciano, the most notable literary scholar in Spain during Cervantes’s
time and whose work Cervantes knew, associates farce and rhetoric
exactly as we encounter it in Cervantes’s entremeses. In the ninth epistle
of his Philosophía Antigua Poética, Fadrique, a reliable spokesperson for
the author, says that the comic poet will find devices for laughter in
rhetoric; rhetoricians use their arguments for persuasion, and comics
use them for humour.8 Fadrique continues with a detailed list of the
rhetorical devices used by comic poets, and offers many concrete
examples, ranging from the use of particular words, figures, and tropes
to larger considerations regarding the place of humour and irony. On
the one hand, as shown above, López Pinciano’s work on rhetoric may
be associated with Cervantes’s, and, on the other, a rhetorical import to
the entremeses is probable, given Cervantes’s notable and extensive
attention to rhetoric in his other works, as discussed by various critics.
Scholars of law, such as Rodolfo Batiza, have documented Cervantes’s
skill in forensic rhetoric. Rhetoric seeks to discover the available means
of persuasion in a given case, where there is always an audience and
always a purpose, developing not only in the contexts of law but also
those of politics and ceremony (respectively forensic, deliberative, and
epideictic rhetoric). We see examples of all three types in the
entremeses.
In the discourses of Don Quixote, the enchanting songs of Preciosa
the Gypsy and Feliciana of the Voice, and the mesmerizing speeches of
Persiles, to name a few, we see the effects of words and the sway of
speeches. As indicated above, this is not merely a penchant for well-
told stories, but the fundamental humanist principle that words, more
than anything else, move human beings to understanding and to action.
In Cervantes’s entremeses, repeatedly we observe the rhetorical guiles of
the greedy, the pusillanimous, the incompetent, the lusty, and the
bumbling as they make their best efforts to persuade other people to go
along with their wishes and schemes.
A final related point about language is that not only does its use and
abuse permeate the entremeses, but also its imagery abounds. Scattered
throughout the corpus are mentions of magic words, duplicitous
language, the devil’s hold on the tongue, the ‘sharpening’ of the tongue,
lies, gossip, slander, whispers, magic spells, supplications, adulation,
insults, promises, complaints, and related terms and phenomena, with
each interlude averaging somewhat more than two dozen such
references. A quick glance, for example, reveals around thirty in La
cueva de Salamanca and sixty in the attributed Los habladores.
Characters
The second of Asensio’s observations, that Cervantes nearly doubles the
number of characters in each entremés, is another innovation with
several dimensions. One takes us back to the matter of language, since
the expansion of characters was not only in number but also in the
repertoire of character types with their various modes of speaking. To
be precise, Cervantes not only populated his stage with more characters
but also introduced a new urban group of characters with urban ways
and urban ways of speaking. In fact, most of his entremeses are situated
in cities, primarily in Madrid, and in those plays the language is not
much different from that of Madrid today. To some extent, this is also
true regarding germanía, the dialect spoken by Madrid’s underworld
street figures, a marginal group broadly represented in these entremeses.
Of course, these urban characters not only have different language
practices than their rustic counterparts but also different day-to-day
challenges, realities that Cervantes incorporates into his plays. Thus,
the more we look into the context, broad and narrow, of this period in
the history of Spain—and Madrid more precisely—the more factual
concerns, details, and incidents we recognize informing the plays. In
the introduction to his edition of the Entremeses, Nicholas Spadacinni
describes the contemporary framework of the interludes, drawing out
the socioeconomic transformations and crises of the first fifteen years of
the seventeenth century, in a period that left many Spaniards in the
social and economic margins of society.9 These marginalized characters
populate the Entremeses. Cervantes’s expansion of character types made
for more complicated relationships, thickened plots, and richer
language variety reflecting no longer the tired stuff of sleepy villages.
but rather, the quotidian challenges of contemporary urban life; in
Cervantes’s hands, the genre retains the same ancient broad strokes of
farce, but the sensibility and details correspond closely to his times. In
effect, Cervantes ushered the entremeses into modernity.
Resolution
The third and final of Cervantes’s innovations in his entremeses lies in
their resolutions, which Asensio describes as a substitution of
traditional carnivalesque rounds of insults and blows with reciprocal
harmony followed by song and dance.10 Earlier entremeses and pasos
before them characteristically ended, as Asensio writes, in some sort of
personal abuse, usually a symbolic light flogging. These mock floggings
served as public atonements for the various peccadillos as everyone,
fellow characters as well as audience members, had a laugh at the
expense of the isolated individual whose weaknesses were exposed for
all to see. Such a crude knockabout conclusion to a play manages to be
simultaneously silly and cruel, the kind of ending associated with
carnival spectacles, commedia dell’arte, and Punch-and-Judy farce.
Cervantes’s resolutions are of another order. They are, in quick and
sure strokes, intimations of the perennial complexities of human life
conscientiously left intact, not swatted away with slapstick or flattened
with an estanca or matapecados like Mr Punch’s club. In his entremeses,
Cervantes replace the physical humour of a wallop with something
smarter and more complex. If it is harmony, as Asensio describes it
above, it is imposed, not organic, and it is seriously hampered by
brevity, lasting perhaps barely to the end of the play. It is also
tempered by irony, which, in a spectacle of song and dance, replaces
the club as the new characteristic feature with which to end the show.
The Cervantine resolution to his entremeses is a wobbly limbo, where
the only harmony comes in the singing and the only sure-footedness in
the dancing. All is vaguely uneasy, and the fragile steadiness only
underlines an unresolved situation. There is always a hint of trouble
just over the horizon, even as clergy, police, soldiers, and all manner of
authority ineffectually rush in to re-establish a lost order, or perhaps
establish one that was never there in the first place.
We may add to the three areas listed and described by Asensio,
those of character, language, and resolution, yet one more: Cervantes’s
concern with the functional aspect of rhetoric and persuasion, which in
the entremeses is a consistently ignominious mode, as I will describe. In
fact, one can separate the entremeses of Ocho comedias, y ocho
entremeses, nunca representados into two groups according to the
function of the rhetoric employed; the first four, following Cervantes’s
list from his Ocho entremeses, may be seen to feature rhetoric in its
defensive function whereas the second four employ rhetoric in its
offensive function. An examination of each of the plays illustrates the
two distinct natures of persuasion in each group.
The Plays
In the first play, El juez de los divorcios, unhappy couples crowd into a
people’s court to make their various cases for divorce, delivering
amusing and exaggerated harangues against their spouses. One wife
complains that her husband is too old for her and has bad breath, and
another calls her husband a leño [block of wood] who does not bring
home enough money to keep her from prostitution. Another husband
responds to the judge’s request for proof of incompatibility with his
wife ‘Qué más pruebas, sino que yo no quiero morir con ella, ni ella
gusta de vivir conmigo’ [‘What proof do I need other than that I don’t
want to die with her and she doesn’t want to live with me?’], to which
the judge responds ‘Si eso bastase para descasarse los casados,
infinitísimos sacudirían de sus hombros el yugo de matrimonio’ [‘If that
were enough to undo married couples, infinite numbers would shake
off their shoulders the yoke of matrimony’].11 In case after case,
accuser and accused speak, and neither is able to better the argument
of the spouse. Naturally, in the end not a single divorce is granted. The
judge’s brief and official comment with which he denies the divorces—
that he finds no reason—summarily shuts down the court. A troupe of
gypsies, in town to celebrate a wedding, breaks into song, and the
mood is temporarily transformed by the merriment. The chorus of the
closing song is ‘[V]ale el peor concierto más que el divorcio mejor’
[‘The worse concert is better than the best divorce’].12 Everyone dances
together in a merry but fragile restoration of familial order, one that
will last at least for the duration of the song.
The second play, El rufián viudo llamado Trampagos features
characters of el hampa, Madrid’s underworld, here a lively and
inventive group of prostitutes and pimps. Trámpagos, the leader of the
group, gathers everyone together to eulogize Pericona, his preferred
prostitute, his girl, who has just passed away. He begins his plaint,
mentioned earlier, ‘¡Ah Pericona, Pericona mía/Y aun de todo el
concejo!’ [Oh Pericona, my Pericona/and even of the whole city
council!’].13 In this planctus, which is traditional—at least in form—
Trámpagos praises Pericona’s skills and ability to make money, making
it clear to all present that he takes care of those who serve him well.
Trámpagos then announces a contest to find his new favourite, and
several girls line up to make their cases, imitating Trámpagos’s mode of
praise with veiled references to their particular wiles and skills. The
king of the hampa, Escarramán, who has just escaped from the police,
makes an appearance and sings a ballad of his recent feats, outdoing
them all in self-promotion, and they all dance together to celebrate
Trámpagos and his newly chosen favourite. Theirs is a kind of
marriage, or at least union, of convenience openly based on sexual
prowess and economic venture, lasting potentially until death,
authorized and fêted, if not blessed, by the most honoured authority of
the Madrid underworld. The merry wedding, again, is fragile and
ironic; according to their arrangements, soon she will be with other
men, perhaps even the whole town council, and making money for
Trámpagos, her pimp.
La elección de los alcaldes de Daganzo is the third play of this group.
Here a group of rustic aldermen meets to select a new mayor for their
village. An oral exam will be the test, since they are looking for a
mayor skilled in jurisprudence, and the candidates come forth one by
one to make their cases, mirroring the competition from the previous
play. Their country way of speaking is, as always, funny, as are their
perverted attempts to show erudition. The features that the candidates
share about themselves commending them for the position include a
drunk describing his skills as a wine taster, a hunter telling what a good
shot he is, and an ‘old Christian’ proving his piety with a few
memorized prayers. When a group of gypsies comes in dancing and
singing a somewhat lewd song popular in the day, a sacristan enters the
boisterous scene and tries to end the fun. Pedro Rana, one of the
candidates, who is quick with his tongue, upbraids the meddling
sacristan with these words:
Dime, desventurado: ¿qué demonio
se revistió en tu lengua? ¿Quién te mete
a ti en reprehender a la justicia?
¿Has tú de gobernar a la república?
[Tell me, unlucky one, what devil
took hold of your tongue? Who are
you to reprimand the justice?
Should you be governing the republic?]14
Pedro Rana’s quick reaction and rhetorical finesse here impress the
aldermen; Rana, who silences the sacristan trying to intervene in public
affairs, will be selected as the new mayor.15 They all gather to toss the
sacristan in a blanket as punishment, and Rana, who incites the
punishment, convinces them to leave him in peace. The last line of the
play says of Pedro Rana that ‘No solamente canta, sino encanta’ [‘He
not only sings but enchants’].16 They revel in the results of their
election, but there are questions about Rana already in the air. Is Rana
a good choice, a prudent vir bonus dicendi peritus who represents the
concerns and interest of the town well, or is he a manipulative
demagogue in the making who will cause trouble with his slick tongue?
In the final play of the first group, La guarda cuidadosa, a shabby
soldier with trace characteristics of Don Quixote does his best to make
his case as a desirable husband to a scrubmaid named Cristina. He
stands vigil outside Cristina’s house pronouncing to her and to
everyone passing by his virtues, which he tries to support with many
types of evidence that only have in common the fact that they do not
add up to much. He tries lofty rhetoric and Petrarchan poetics, he
proffers documents and witness accounts of his military feats, and he
makes efforts to show his physical strength. In the end, the
unimpressed Cristina goes off with a sacristan who at least has a little
money. Sadly, nothing the soldier has to offer is of value.
In the first set of four plays, El juez de los divorcios, El rufián viudo
llamado Trampagos, La elección del alcaldes de Daganzo, and La guarda
cuidadosa, the characters defend themselves, make their cases, and talk
themselves into or out of situations, employing a variety of measures
and with varying outcomes. The basic mode is the apology, apologia, an
oral self-defence of an individual. An apologia is a direct appeal to
interlocutors for a charitable hearing and positive judgment. The
apologia is associated with forensic rhetoric in that it is delivered to a
foro, public forum. Some are short, others long; some end in favourable
outcomes, others do not. Many are to strangers and new acquaintances,
fewer are to friends and family. Everywhere the apologia appears in
Cervantes’s works it is shown as a fundamental human gesture, and,
accordingly, prized when resulting in a positive and just outcome. As
we have seen, this gesture of self-defence is featured and highlighted
repeatedly in these entremeses, giving a shared rhetorical motif to each
of the plays. Following in particular Spadaccini’s view that Cervantes’s
entremeses reflect the crisis of early seventeenth-century Spain, we find
that those characters engaged in self-defence are precisely from the
socioeconomic strata undergoing most transformations and duress at
that time; these include, but are not limited to, women, peasants, and
soldiers.
The next four entremeses, El vizcaíno fingido, El retablo de las
maravillas, La cueva de Salamanca, and El viejo celoso feature rhetoric
used in an offensive rather than defensive function. The first two plays
are tightly orchestrated swindles, both requiring the creation of
different kinds of illusions and both requiring people capable of making
others doubt themselves. They are persuaded to doubt what they see
and to doubt what they know to be the truth, and for different reasons
in each case.
In El vizcaíno fingido, two men from Madrid, Solórzano and
Quiñones, turn the tables on a pair of high-class prostitutes, Cristina
and Brígida, who scheme to gain the favours, and then the money, of a
wealthy, generous, and naïve Basque, or vizcaíno, who does not take his
drink well. Quiñones plays the Basque, a stock character, by acting
tipsy and garbling his syntax, and Solórzano plays the role of his
chaperone. Cristina and Brígida deceitfully present themselves as well-
educated young ladies, but between themselves they discuss their
greedy intentions. The women talk about the fact that times have been
especially difficulty for them in Madrid since the passing of the law
forbidding them from moving around the city veiled, a law that was a
historical reality.17 The somewhat desperate women fall quickly into
the charade of the pretend Basque, a ‘bait and switch’ scheme involving
a gold chain. At the end, the men apologize for their little joke, as
Solórzano had planned to do, but the scam has exposed the
vulnerability of the women.
In El retablo de las maravillas, the sixth play, a group of aldermen
permits a travelling theatre troupe into their village to perform at the
wedding of the mayor’s daughter. The theatre group is directed by
Chanfalla, who quickly ingratiates himself with the aldermen and
establishes his legitimacy as a theatre director by claiming to be giving
performances to benefit the Hospital Brethren of Madrid, another
historically factual reference in the entremeses. Chanfalla, however, is a
confidence man travelling with a few players, a few props, and a
musician of sorts, but no play; for his swindle he does not need one.
Chanfalla announces that that the marvels of their play are so special
that they can be seen by neither bastard nor new Christian
(descendants of ancestors who professed a faith other than
Christianity), thrusting the town into a state of anxiety. The
townspeople’s personal racial and social fears render them susceptible
to the scam, and they all realize that if they do not see something on
the stage they must pretend to do so nonetheless or risk life-changing
consequences.
Teresa Kirschner, who describes this interlude as a dramatization of
fear, has analysed its exposition, materialization, and personification.
Kirschner demonstrates how all the characters in Retablo—the
perseguidos [persecuted] as well as the perseguidores [persecutors]—
manifest a significant degree of apprehension and that the work may be
seen to reflect the psychological effects of ‘persecutorial fury’ of
Cervantes’s society.18 The Retablo, thus, dramatizes the very capacity to
create fear. Specifically, I suggest, it dramatizes the distinct form of fear
that may best be described as hermeneutical anxiety. Hermeneutical
anxiety is a type of fear associated with interpretation in a public
context. It derives from the perception, be it false or true, that one is
somehow outside the hermeneutical circle and thus incapable of
making reliable and appropriate interpretations. This perception may
lead to a crisis in interpretation and ultimately a fundamental
insecurity regarding one’s ability to discern the meaning of things.
Retablo is a perfect dramatic instantiation of the phenomenon of
hermeneutical anxiety, and its lead character, Chanfalla, is at the centre
of it all. Chanfalla, who is not performing for charity but for mercenary
reasons, masterfully converts the villagers’ fear of exposure and
marginalization into a type of fear associated with interpretation in a
public context.
It is a remarkable fact of the play that, as indicated in their very
names, the people of the village are clearly a mixed community of
‘legitimate’, ‘illegitimate’, new Christians, old Christians, and others, all
of whom seem to live together peacefully with little regard for these
differences. Now Chanfalla threatens to drive a wedge into their
division, and there will be those who can see the miracles and those
who cannot; the former will have the status of racial and social
legitimacy, and the latter will not be able to claim that status and will
be regarded as suffering from ‘enfermedades’ [‘diseases’].19 Such a
scheme is treacherous to the community. There is more; Chanfalla sets
up his theatrical ‘test’ in such a way that no one can disprove it since it
only exists in the imagination. Everyone in that village then falls
outside the hermeneutical circle as Chanfalla has deceptively drawn it,
and everyone must lie—or remain silent—in order to maintain status in
the community.
The charade is, of course, absurd. Once Chanfalla begins his show,
the audience members make great efforts to demonstrate that they are
experiencing what he is describing, dodging rushing waters, shrieking
at stampeding mice, and dancing with Biblical figures. Pretending to
see what they do not and pretending not to see what they do leads to a
chaotic crisis of interpretation in which the villagers end up mistrusting
their own judgement, motivations, faculties, and discernment. Such is
the state of things in this village when a quartermaster shows up
seeking lodging for his squadron headed to the town. The crowd
quickly turns on him, calling him a converso, when he correctly states
that there is nothing at all on the marvellous stage, but before any
crisis can explode, gypsy singers and dancers show up for the wedding.
As in the other entremeses, the music restores harmony in the village,
but one anticipates that the harmony will soon be interrupted when the
full squadron, which is not far off, arrives to the village. Though this is
a comic story, it has a very real background associated with the
manipulation of reality through illusion and the ruling of a republic.
The play ends with a small military skirmish in progress, a symbolic
clash between the villagers and the military, while Chanfalla and his
cohorts congratulate themselves for having pulled off another swindle.
In the next entremés, La cueva de Salamanca, a wily and witty student
of Salamanca, another stock character, talks his way into lodging for
the night at the home of a woman whose husband is out of town and
who is in the midst of an evening of dinner, and whatever follows, with
another man. When the husband returns unexpectedly, the student, the
wife, and the maid—who also has a male visitor there and for the same
reason—contrive to pull off a charade. Armed with ‘spells’ from black
magic he claims to have learned in the cave of Salamanca, the student
convinces the gullible husband that the two visiting men are devils who
resemble two of their neighbours. The husband is surprised at the exact
resemblances but in the end goes along with the story. To some degree,
he is persuaded by all that what he plainly sees and hears and
recognizes is not what it appears to be, thus creating mistrust similar to
that of El retablo de las maravillas. The husband is forced to believe
something that he perceives is not true because doing so, in a way,
saves him from a lot of trouble. In the end, they all share the dinner
together, husband and wife, maid, student, and the two ‘devils’.
El viejo celoso is similar to La cueva de Salamanca in that a young
woman schemes to cuckold her husband, this time a jealous old man,
another stock character, who won’t let her leave the house. Lorenza,
the young woman, is urged on by her maid Cristina and also by a
female match-making neighbour Ortigosa who, like the student above,
is associated with witchcraft and happy to assist in the deception.
Cristina sneaks Lorenza’s lover into the house and then into her
bedroom by hiding him behind a large unfurled tapestry, which
Ortigosa holds on display and whose scenes she describes in order to
distract the old man. The tapestry is covered with figures of knight
errantry, and Ortigosa’s inventive and detailed storytelling keeps the
old man’s attention on the stories in the tapestry rather than on the
action going on behind it.
These final four plays are built around deception and manipulation
of others’ abilities to discern the truth of the matter and to see what is
in plain sight. In El vizcaíno fingido, things and people are not what and
who they seem to be. In El retablo de las maravillas, honest perception
and interpretation are impossible for those outside a falsely drawn
hermeneutical circle. In La cueva de Salamanca, possibilities and figures
never dreamed of are conjured up, inserted into everyday life and not
revealed so that the status quo is not disturbed. And finally, in El viejo
celoso, imitative figures draw eyes away from, and thus obfuscate, the
realities of life that are there but not seen. In sum, the plays in the
second group manipulate the distinction between reality and
appearance.
While the first group of entremeses may be associated with crises that
are socioeconomic in nature, we may associate the second group with
the sceptical attitude that modern philosophy takes toward appearance.
In that attitude, appearances are to be doubted until confirmed with
certainty, and once appearances are disassociated from reality, one
loses one’s basis for judgement, opening up the space for all varieties of
manipulation. In the modern crisis around theories of knowledge and
nature, appearances are not to be trusted, and the relationship between
seems and is is confused. This theoretical insecurity defines modernity,
and seventeenth-century Spain was no exception. In the entremeses,
characters are led to doubt both that which they know to be true and
that which they see to be real. In the second group of entremeses, there
is an awareness not only of this insecurity but also a demonstration of
how and why it can be easily manipulated by others for any number of
less-than-noble reasons. How and why people persuade others to falsely
see and falsely believe—or at least act as if they do—is a key concern
that is captured in the entremeses. This overview focusing in part on the
use and abuse of rhetoric in Cervantes’s entremeses thus reveals a
leitmotiv associating Cervantes with those humanist writers of the
Renaissance who, as Victoria Kahn words it, ‘were frequently less
concerned with persuading us to action than with persuading us to
consider the nature of persuasion itself’.20
Finally, I would like to turn to Los habladores—a work widely
attributed to Cervantes—that closely corresponds in its rhetorical
themes to features seen in his eight known entremeses, a fact that
supports Cervantes’s authorship. In Los habladores the protagonist
Roldán overhears a conversation between two men, Sarmiento and a
man whom Sarmiento has stabbed. Sarmiento offers to pay the man
retribution, and Roldán, desperate for money, steps in and offers to
take a stabbing from Sarmiento for even less money. Roldán makes a
plea and only stops when Sarmiento says, ‘¡Téngase, que me ha muerto,
y pienso que algún demonio tiene revestido en esa lengua!’ [‘Stop!
You’re killing me, and I think the Devil has got hold of your
tongue!’].21 Sarmiento rejects the ridiculous proposal, but Roldán’s
verbosity and his particular way with words give Sarmiento an idea.
Sarmiento proposes to Roldán that he take residence at his house for a
while to cure Doña Beatriz, his wife, of the same verbal affliction,
fighting fire with fire. Though at first Doña Beatriz enjoys Roldán’s
company, soon she is outdone in the verbal duel and begs her husband
to send Roldán away: ‘Reviento por hablar’ [‘I’m dying to speak’].22 A
policeman shows up regarding the stabbing, and Roldán, who turns out
to be a wanted man, hides in a rolled-up rug, where he and the rug end
up being beaten, in the manner of a dusting, by the women of the
house—a remnant gesture from the mock floggings—as he waits for the
policeman to leave. He is discovered and arrested, but Sarmiento asks
for clemency for Roldán for his having cured the babbling Doña
Beatriz, and the policeman proposes that Roldán go to his house to cure
his wife of the same disease. Sarmiento allows Roldán to leave only
after Doña Beatriz promises to talk less. The song at the end is about
being ‘sick at one’s tongue’.
Endless strings of loosely connected minutiae, jumbles of disparate
topics, and errors of logic mark the augmented speech of Roldán and
Doña Beatriz in this play. Misused Latin, pseudo-science, and pseudo-
theology, all there to give a semblance of veracity to the many
ridiculous assertions, make their verbal exchanges further ridiculous.
The lengthy and absurd speech of the chattering Doña Beatriz and
Roldán exhausts all interlocutors and convinces none. Doña Beatriz and
Roldán, a stock character of a rascal student with pretensions of skill,
both take their cues from methods of argumentation taught in Book II
of Erasmus’s De duplici copia verborum ac rerum commentarri duo (1512),
or De copia. De copia is a manual for developing a rich oratorical style
and was widely used in the education of schoolboys on the continent
and in England, including Shakespeare, during the sixteenth century.
Cervantes would probably have had his share of this kind of practice as
a student of the humanist López de Hoyos, as it is believed he was. Los
habladores pokes fun at the abuse of rhetorical style and at the fact that
Roldán the schemer can talk himself into and out of everything. The
play also exposes the pretentious and slavish adherence to rules of style
in vogue in certain contemporary circles.23 The thematic focus on
rhetoric, language imagery, and this kind of humour strongly suggest
that Cervantes is the author of Los habladores. Other factors do not,
such as the flogging of Roldán and lack of significant irony in play at
the end, but those features could be explained by Los habladores having
been written before Cervantes settled on his innovations.
Conclusion: The Ignominies of Persuasion
Elsewhere I discuss how Cervantes’s Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda
depicts the heroics of persuasion. The Persiles poeticizes the powerful
role of rhetoric in the world; as the characters make their long and
perilous voyage across Europe, the hero Persiles, a vir bonus dicendi
peritus, skilfully employs rhetoric and always to good ends and to the
good of all. Persiles thwarts a continuous flood of potentially violent
conflicts as his group confronts pirates, rapists, thieves, and murderous
tyrants. Cervantes’s entremeses depict precisely the opposite; that is to
say, in the entremeses Cervantes dramatizes not the heroic use of
language but, rather, its misuse and abuse.
Indeed, it is no exaggeration to say that deficiencies in persuasion,
either or both in its means and its ends, is at the very core of
Cervantes’s entremeses. In the first four plays we see deficient rhetoric
used defensively as a means of self-promotion. In El juez de los divorcios,
plaintiffs line up to make their risible cases in court, and in Trampágos,
prostitutes present their skills and wiles in a contest to be the pimp’s
new favourite. La guarda cuidadosa features an ignored soldier who
competes with a sacristan for the love of a young scrubmaid; and,
finally, La elección de los alcaldes de Daganzo presents unqualified
aspirants to political office delivering ridiculous campaign speeches. In
the second four plays, we see manipulative rhetoric used offensively: in
El vizcaíno fingido, where ill-behaved men trick a pair of opportunistic
prostitutes, in La cueva de Salamanca, El retablo de las maravillas, and El
viejo celoso, where self-serving deception is the intent in each case,
either for romance, money, or the thrill of the swindle.
Solórzano, one of the characters in El vizcaíno fingido, qualifies jokes,
just as they are getting ready to play one on the prostitutes, by saying
that ‘no son burlas las que redundan en desprecio ajeno’ [‘jokes that
result in contempt for others are not jokes’].24 This comment captures
Cervantes’s charity with the characters of the entremeses, whose foibles
are exposed but who never suffer greatly. The exploits of the
marginalized characters in Cervantes’s entremeses, while ignominious,
are fully comprehensible and thoroughly enjoyed; they make their best
efforts to defend themselves and improve their lots in their lives as do
all, regardless of status or station. Cervantes draws laughter at their
efforts and even their base motivations, but farce in Cervantes’s hand is
never cruel: no one is excoriated, no one beaten, a noteworthy
counterpoint to the genre of the comedia, in which the entremeses are
embedded as plays within plays. In the Spanish comedia, the plays of
the rich, the educated, and the powerful, the motivations for the
actions of the characters and means of achieving them are never quite
as funny, the outcomes always more severe, the characters expected to
be and to do better given all that they have.
Works Cited
Asensio, Eugenio. ‘Entremeses’. In Suma Cervantina, edited by Juan Bautista
Avalle-Arce and E. C. Riley (London: Tamesis, 1973), pp. 171–97.
Asensio, Eugenio. Introduction to Entremeses by Miguel de Cervantes (Madrid:
Castalia, 1986), pp. 7–49.
Batiza, Rodolfo. Don Quijote y el derecho: Cultura jurídica de don Miguel de
Cervantes (Mexico: Librería de Manuel Porrúa, 1964).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Entremeses, edited by Carolyn Lukens-Olson
(LinguaText: Newark, Delaware, 2010).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Novelas ejemplares, vol. I, edited by Harry Sieber
(Madrid: Cátedra, 1997).
García Valdés, Celsa Carmen. Introduction to Entremeses by Miguel de Cervantes
Saavedra (Madrid: Santillana, 1997).
Honig, Edwin. Introduction to Interludes by Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra (New
York: New American Library, 1964).
Kahn, Victoria. Rhetoric, Prudence, and Skepticism in the Renaissance (Ithaca:
Cornell University Press, 1985).
Kirschner, Teresa J. ‘El retablo de las maravillas, de Cervantes, o la dramatización
del miedo’. In Cervantes: Su obra y su mundo: Actas del I Congreso Internacional
sobre Cervantes, edited by Manuel Criado de Val (Madrid; Edi-6, 1981), pp.
819–27.
López Pinciano, Alonso. Philosophía Antigua Poética (Madrid: Fundación José
Antonio de Castro, 1998).
Lukens-Olson, Carolyn. ‘Cervantes’s Attributed Los habladores and Erasmus’s
Ciceronianus: Satire and Emulation’. In On Wolves and Sheep: Exploring the
Expression of Political Thought in Golden Age Spain, edited by Aaron M. Kahn
(Newcastle-upon-Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2011), pp. 51–72.
Lukens-Olson, Carolyn. ‘Heroics of Persuasion in Cervantes’s Los trabajos de
Persiles y Sigismunda’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 21,
no. 2 (2001):pp. 51–72.
Spadaccini, Nicholas. Introduction to Entremeses by Miguel de Cervantes
Saavedra (Madrid: Catédra, 1997), pp. 9–87.
Spadaccini, Nicholas. Through the Shattering Glass: Cervantes and the Self-Made
World (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1992).
Wardropper, Bruce. ‘Ambiguity in El viejo celoso’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the
Cervantes Society of America 1 (1981): pp. 19–27.
Ynduraín, Francisco. ‘El tema del vizcaíno en Cervantes’. Anales Cervantinos 1
(1961): pp. 337–43.
1 Honig, Interludes, p. ix.
2 See Chapter 22 for a study of works attributed to Cervantes.
3 For a discussion of similarities between the Entremeses and Don Quixote,
see Spadaccini’s Introduction to his edition, where he describes the Entremeses
within the context of the socio-economic crisis of Spain throughout the first
decades of the seventeenth century; see also Spadaccini, Through the Shattering
Glass…
4 For more on language in the Entremeses, see García Valdés (pp. 149–50)
and Lukens-Olson’s Introduction to her edition of the Entremeses (pp. 15–21).
5 Cervantes, Entremeses, p. 146. All quotations from the Entremeses have
been translated by the author of this chapter.
6 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, p. 51.
7 Asensio, Entremeses, pp. 11–14.
8 López Pinciano, p. 45.
9 Spadacinni, Introduction, p. 20.
10 Asensio, Introducción crítica, p. 12.
11 Cervantes, Entremeses, p. 42.
12 Cervantes, Entremeses, p. 45.
13 Cervantes, Entremeses, p. 48.
14 Cervantes, Entremeses, p. 92.
15 That this was a real issue in the early seventeenth century is indicated by
Antonio Carvalho’s treatise published in Madrid in 1626 titled Un discurso sobre
si conviene que los predicadores reprehendan príncipes y ministros [A Discourse on
the Appropriateness of Preachers Admonishing Princes and Ministers].
16 Cervantes, Entremeses, p. 93.
17 An edict of 1611 attempting to control prostitution forbade women to
wear veils when travelling around Madrid, either in public or in horse carriages,
an offense punishable by a banishment of four years from the city.
18 Kirchner, p. 826.
19 Cervantes, Entremeses, p. 147.
20 Kahn, p. 28.
21 Cervantes, Entremeses, p. 208.
22 Cervantes, Entremeses, p. 214.
23 See Lukens-Olson (‘Cervantes’s Attributed…’) where Los habladores is
discussed as a satire of Erasmus’s Ciceronianus, itself a satire of Ciceronian
rhetoric.
24 Cervantes, Entremeses, p. 119.
Chapter 18
Cervantes and the comedia nueva
Moisés R. Castillo
University of Kentucky
An attention to stagecraft overflows in Cervantes’s work, basically in
every way he created fiction.1 It is known that Cervantes wanted, above
all things, to be successful on the Golden Age stage and to become a
famous playwright. But the characteristics of his generation’s theatre—
what Stefano Arata refers to as ‘The Lost Generation’ of the 1580s2 and
which included Lupercio Leonardo de Argensola, Cristóbal de Virués,
Francisco de la Cueva, Cristóbal de Mesa, Juan de la Cueva, Gabriel
Lobo Lasso de la Vega, and Andrés Rey de Artieda, among others—
along with his elaborate theatrical designs and Lope de Vega’s rising
popularity, led Cervantes to give up his aspirations to the stage and
focus on his prose. However, unlike any other author during this
period, Cervantes continued to breathe theatricality into that prose.
Structures, themes, characters, and settings shift constantly between
distinct genres, unveiling details about Cervantes’s life and worldview.
Moreover, at times the line between theatre and prose seems to mix or
blur, for instance, in El coloquio de los perros or in numerous episodes of
Don Quixote that demonstrate the dramatic imagination in Cervantes’s
works. Additionally, the fact that Cervantes’s writing emphasizes
dialogue is of no surprise, as it is infused with a profound humanism,
often of Erasmian roots. This was likely due to the influence of
important 
sixteenth-century 
humanistic 
dialogues 
with 
which
Cervantes would have been familiar, as Américo Castro, Marcel
Bataillon, and Antonio Vilanova have suggested.
In his ‘Adjunta al Parnaso’, Cervantes claims to have thought about
publishing six comedias along with his new entremeses with the
intention ‘para que se vea de espacio lo que pasa apriesa y se disimula,
o no se entiende, cuando las representan’3 [that people may see at their
leisure 
or 
in 
detail 
what 
happens 
hurriedly, 
inaccurately,
surreptitiously, and often unintelligibly when acted on the stage].4 This
is a clear critique of Lope de Vega’s new art of comedia nueva, which
exemplifies the Baroque spectacular that essentially bewildered and
entertained the masses, moulding, in most cases, an acritical spectator.
Cervantes’s theatre, on the contrary, would use this spectacular nature,
this artificiality, to highlight its very meta-theatrical character. Thus, it
would be a theatre that turns in on itself, that gazes inward, and whose
purpose is twofold: on the one hand, it denudes the scaffolding of
artistic creation, revealing the multiple stages of theatrical crafting, and
on the other hand, it denounces the ideological inconsistencies that
went unnoticed in Lope’s spectacular comedia of the masses, where one
did not have time to see or judge ‘slowly and in detail what happens so
rapidly’. In other words, Cervantes uses his theatre to expose the
contradictions and fatuous ideals, such as a code of honour or blood
purity, rooted in and propagated by seventeenth-century Counter-
Reformation Spain. His objective is to awaken readers to the
aforementioned rigid myths, to provoke a reflexive reading, thereby
forcing his audience to adopt a critical position towards that which is
presented to them, either in the text or on the stage. With these tools in
hand, Cervantes would not only make the reading or theatrical public
feel like they are in on the joke so that his ‘reader’ (‘lector mío’)
becomes a co-artificer in his artistic work, but would also influence the
public towards a mode of conduct, an ethic that would lead to virtue
and honourable behaviour [buen obrar].
In the prologue to the Ocho comedias, y ocho entremeses nuevos, nunca
representados, Cervantes claimed to have written twenty or thirty plays
during his lifetime yet only a third of these have actually been found.
In stark contrast to the focus on central action seen in Lope’s theatre,
Cervantes’s plays focus on concepts. In other words, they explore ideas,
not moments of action.5 This is, perhaps, what impedes critics from
creating universal models of interpretation for Cervantes’s theatre,
whether it is because they see it as too episodic or because they believe
it has a lack of dramatic unity. Additionally, and due mostly to those
traits, there has been a polemic among critics over whether Cervantes
intended for his theatre to be read, as opposed to seen. I agree with
Kenneth Stackhouse when he contends that, although Cervantes wanted
his plays to be performed, he did not expect they would be. This
provoked a sense of artistic freedom in his writing and theatrical
innovations in staging.6 These traits of Cervantes’s theatrical craft not
only defied the dramatic conventions of his time, but questioned
popular ideological beliefs. Definitively, Cervantes was concerned
about mass culture, and the commodification of the Spanish stage, as is
evidenced by the fact that ‘las comedias se han hecho mercadería
vendible’ [comedias have become goods for sale],7 and he advocated for
a critically responsive reader or public who would be resistant to media
manipulation.
And yet, how has Cervantes’s theatre been viewed over time? How
do we see his attitudes on theatre and the comedia nueva exemplified
within the works themselves? What is at the core of his innovations
with regard to stagecraft and ideology? As critics have noted,
Cervantine theatre was initially rejected: it was dismissed in the
seventeenth century, criticized harshly in the eighteenth,8 and only
slightly appreciated by nineteenth-century German Romantics who
focused primarily on Numancia’s tragic patriotism. It is only in the
twentieth and twenty-first centuries that we have seen a reclamation
and revaluation of Cervantes’s theatrical contributions in serious
monographic studies and performances dedicated in his honour. 9
Regarding Cervantes’s thoughts on the comedia nueva and the theatre
of his time, it is important to take note of the few passages in which the
playwright speaks more directly about his dramatic works. To begin
with, there are Don Quixote’s words, often interpreted as his author’s
confession: ‘porque desde muchacho fui aficionado a la carátula, y en
mi mocedad se me iban los ojos tras la farándula’ [because ever since I
was a youngster I have been a fan of the mask of the theatre, and in my
youth my eyes were drawn to the spectacle].10 Next, there is
Cervantes’s admiration for his predecessor, the ‘Great Lope de Rueda’,
as he declares in the prologue to Ocho comedias. Here, Cervantes also
mentions that he wrote up to thirty works ‘que todas ellas se recitaron
sin que se les ofreciese ofrenda de pepinos’ [that all of them were
staged without a single cucumber offering].11 Lastly, there is the partial
list of comedia titles in his ‘Adjunta al Parnaso’, the majority of which
Cervantes claims not to remember.
Cervantes establishes a unique dialogue with the comedia nueva in
works such as Pedro de Urdemalas and El Rufián dichoso. Yet, perhaps
passages from Don Quixote I.48—in several different conversations
between the knight-errant, priest, and canon—reveal most clearly
Cervantes’s ethical and aesthetic opinions regarding Lope’s—and his
followers’—rise to success. Cervantes, along with other members of his
theatrical generation, imbued with humanistic training, sought to
surpass the preceding theatre by dignifying it.12 That is to say, they
infused it with a certain personal and social ethical content. Its purpose
was to illustrate and disseminate ideas without discarding its
spectacular nature, which, according to Agustín de la Granja, ‘is what
provided the base for Cervantes’s theatre, in its early years’.13 The
effort to infuse a greater sense of the ethical in the spectacular, a
‘poetics of freedom’, nevertheless found itself inevitably subordinated
to the comedia’s aesthetic quality, governed by artistic precepts,
classical or not.14 This poetic freedom is what led Cervantes to
experiment regularly and why his dramatic works do not fit neatly into
a single mould. Thus, his theatre, more than any other Cervantine text,
displays the author’s humanism clearly and directly, his concern over
expressing the authentic, complex, and precarious realities of life.15 As
Rey Hazas and Muñoz Sánchez have noted, Cervantes ‘ridiculed and
mocked Lope’s—and his disciples’—theatre at every opportunity,
particularly for their excessive use of stereotypes and purely theatrical
clichés, removed from the realities of everyday life, which he deemed a
crime against art’.16 We are faced, therefore, with a playwright who,
‘rather than “representing” the world, projects the world itself as a
representation’.17
The rest of this essay explores examples of how Cervantes deploys
his humanism and offers ethical solutions in his comedias of captivity,
dramas in which he deals with the Other, and the vision this Other has
of us. We focus on these plays because, perhaps more than in any
others of his production, Cervantes displays his aesthetic innovations
aimed at exposing the contradictions and vacuous ideals imposed by
the absolutist monarchical ideology, which were very often propagated
by Lope de Vega’s theatre for the masses [teatro para el vulgo]. These
comedias include: El trato de Argel, Los baños de Argel, La gran sultana
doña Catalina de Oviedo, and La conquista de Jerusalén por Godofre de
Bullón, which Stefano Arata discovered in the late 1980s.
In these four plays, in which Cervantes outlines his vision of the
Other, the reader is brought face to face with a contradiction between a
defence and a criticism of Christian orthodoxy; in other words, a
contradiction implicit in the deployment of multiple passages of a
marked Christian orthodoxy in which dialogues are inserted that are
not only inconsistent with it, but actually subvert it. In my opinion, the
reason for these moments of contradiction, these vacillations, is related
to Cervantes’s plan of bringing to the surface and dismantling, through
his use of irony, various fatuous ideals such as honour, purity of blood,
and exaggerated religious orthodoxy, which are imposed by the
dominant ideology. Cervantes carries out his plan by contrasting the
discourse on honour and excessive religious orthodoxy with the
hypocrisy of human behaviour. Moors are seen through the eyes of
Christians, and Christians through the eyes of Moors, eliciting a kind of
‘vertigo’ that, as pointed out by David R. Castillo, ends up destabilizing
any assumption of a Christian cultural centrality.18 Notions of cultural
essentialism are based on rigid myths, such as a code of honour or
blood purity, which cannot be kept in practice. In fact, the actual
existence of relations between Christian females and Muslim males, or
Muslim females and Christian males, cancels the value and viability of
such myths. In effect, as these four plays show, it is impossible to act in
compliance with the strictures of honour, or to maintain a religious or
racial scrupulousness, without sometimes falling into incongruity or
ridicule. In areas of cultural contact such as Algiers, Constantinople, or
Jerusalem the social fantasy of a radically intrinsic difference between
the One and the Other cannot be maintained.
On first impression, one might argue that these plays represent the
moral superiority of Christians over the irreverence and lawlessness of
the Moors,19 as well as the hardships endured by captive Christians to
defend their own faith in the lands of infidels. It is also clear that in
these texts the Moors are accused of being naive, simpleminded, false,
dishonest, cruel, sodomitic, and worshippers of heavenly bodies—the
moon—like the Amerindians. Yet the question is not so simple, as
illustrated by Johnson and Wardropper, since Cervantes creates
ambivalences that arise from the juxtaposing of contrasting ideas.
Bruce Wardropper stresses this notion when he points out that
Cervantes ‘scrupulously presents both sides of any question’.20
Likewise, Carroll B. Johnson’s approach to La Numancia emphasizes the
intentional ‘ambiguity’ of Cervantine representation, and thereby the
impossibility of a unique or definite interpretation: ‘A “correct”
reading, in the sense of definitely establishing the pre-eminence of one
interpretation over the other, is thus rendered impossible. Precisely, I
believe, as Cervantes wished it to be.’21 In my view, this is a kind of
ambiguity or ambivalence that Cervantes hopes the reader to surmount
so that he can form his own opinion, one that may elicit judgments
with repercussions in the world. Cervantes would thus be taking the
Latin sapere aude—the ‘dare to think’ on your own that exercised so
much influence during the Enlightenment—beyond the area of
knowledge and over to the sphere of responsibility and ethics. By this I
do not mean to suggest a Cervantes with notions proper to the
Enlightenment, in the sense rejected by Mariscal, but rather a
convinced Christian humanist with certain rationalist overtones.
Cervantes strives to question the foundation of ethics and individual
identity in concepts such as blood purity, honour, or nation, imposed
by the political system as if they were part of a veritable Christian
revelation. In its place, he proposes an ethics of virtue based on
rationality and shared values.
In this sense, Cervantes breaks with the vision that Lope’s plays of
1596–1603 seem to have of the Moors as blinded creatures driven by
the devil and therefore unredeemed, inferior, incomplete in the
religious sense, though not in the noble-chivalrous one. This is the case
in such plays by Lope as El hijo de Reduán, El hidalgo bencerraje, El
remedio en la desdicha, El cerco de Santa Fe, La divina vencedora, El sol
parado, and El cordobés valeroso. The Moors in the above plays by Lope,
and later the Indians as well in plays such as El Nuevo Mundo
descubierto por Cristóbal Colón and Arauco domado,22 are presented as
distinguished, courageous, and noble; yet on the other hand they are
incomplete, barbarous beings lacking a God. Cervantes destroys this
dichotomy, showing the complexity of relations between Christians and
the Other, and in doing so he dismantles through irony the vain ideals
on which the identities of both—as well as their hatred and differences
—are founded.
In Cervantes, the human aspect takes pre-eminence over everything
else, and this is reflected in a constant preoccupation with the issue of
honesty, as well as a fine defence of individual virtue. A good example
of this humanism appears in La gran sultana in the exchange between
two renegades, and another one in Los baños when showing the
relations between Christians and Jews. At the beginning of La gran
sultana, when Salec and Roberto talk with each other about their
situation and the fact they have renounced their faith, Salec ends up by
saying: ‘que, si va a decir verdad, / yo ninguna cosa creo’ [that, if truth
be told, / I believe in nothing]. Roberto replies: ‘Fino ateísta te
muestras’ [You are revealing yourself a fine atheist]. And Salec
concludes:
sólo sé que he de mostrarte,
con obras al descubierto,
que soy tu amigo, a la traza
como lo fui en algún tiempo
[all I know is that I will show to you
with plain deeds
that I am still your true friend
as much as I was before.]23
In other words, beliefs matter less than deeds, and this is why
Cervantes shows empathy towards some of those renegades. He
believes that among them there are souls that can still, with some
effort, be recovered for Christendom—let us remember the sermons of
Sayavedra in El trato. At the same time, he thinks these are human
beings who, in many cases, have been drawn to change faith due to
political and economic circumstances.
Regarding the way Jews are presented, while the Jew in La gran
sultana defends against the perversity and insults of a Christian, calling
him in turn ‘bárbaro’ [barbarous] and ‘demonio’ [devil],24 Cervantes
highlights in Los baños, in a burlesque tone, the evil nature of the
Christian in contrast to the humility, submission, innocence, and
sometimes servility of the Jew. The latter describes the other as
‘Cristiano honrado’ [honest Christian],25 ‘Buen cristiano’ [Good
Christian], and ‘señor’,26 while the Spaniard replies by calling him
‘puto judío’ [damned Jew] and ‘hideputa’ [son of a whore].27 Thus in
these plays we can detect the deeply rooted hatred that the Spaniard
has always felt for the Jew, despite the fact that in the land of infidels,
the Christian is a captive while the Jew is one among many free
immigrants. This is perhaps the reason for the tolerance that the
Muslims show toward the Jews, even though they consider the latter
less worthy than Christians and therefore they treat them less fairly
when applying the law. In Los baños, Jews appear as ‘gente afeminada’
[effeminate people],28 guilty of everything because of their refusal to
acknowledge the divinity of Christ, something they also stand accused
of in La gran sultana. However, Cervantes subtly acknowledges his
appreciation of the Jews in this environment, to the extent that they
are the least hypocritical and the most perseverant in the defence of
their own faith. Djadri has made this clear with the following words:
In conclusion, both Christians and Muslims reproach the Jews their
eternal damnation. The former do so ruthlessly; the latter more or less
leniently. And perhaps Cervantes appreciates the attachment that Jews
show for their religion as something exemplary, since he himself
reproaches some Christians for the weakness of their beliefs, and blames
Muslims for their scant faith.29
Cervantes’s humanism is therefore reflected, in jocular but genuine
fashion, in Los baños, when the Jew pays the ransom to free his worst
enemy, the sacristan, even though the latter has been constantly
insulting him, stealing from him, and mistreating him in various ways.
La gran sultana
Perhaps the most fascinating part of La gran sultana is the dialogue
between the Turkish king and the pious Spanish captive Catalina de
Oviedo. In this exchange, the Moor expresses his desire to mix his
blood with that of the Christian woman, arguing that this should
ennoble the Turk and give him a ‘mayor ser’ [greater being]:
No habrá descubierto el sol,
en cuanto ciñe y rodea,
no, quien pase, que igual sea
a un otomano español
[The sun will have never seen,
among everything it encircles and surrounds,
anyone that can match
a Spanish Ottoman.]30
There is even talk of the sons—‘hermosísimos leones’ [most beautiful
lions]31—they will have together. Cervantes’s story line is thus made
explicit; while she stubbornly defends her Christian orthodoxy with an
arrogant, almost naive determination, the Moor, driven by lust, appears
much more tolerant, understanding, laxer, and less intransigent, as he
expresses his desire to marry her without any need for her to renounce
her Christian faith. All of this while we know that Muslims are not
allowed to marry Christians, much less if the marriage is not performed
under Muslim law. At the beginning of the second act, the great Cadí,
who is the judge-bishop of the Turks, emphasizes this very point when
he sentences Madrigal to death if the latter, who has had sexual
relations with a Muslim woman, does not convert to Islam and agrees
to marry her. However, Madrigal’s ruse and Cadí’s laxness in applying
the law end up saving his life. In the third act it will be Cadí, the
religious and political leader himself, who, although feeling
uncomfortable about it, does not prevent the marriage of the great Turk
with the captive Catalina, even when he learns that the Muslim allows
her to continue to practice her Christian religion.
Cervantes, in his plays, departs from the prejudices we have of the
Moor as a blind and intolerant being. It would seem that Cervantes is
making fun of the culture of honour and exaggerated orthodoxy when
he creates in his play a Moor who is as lustful as the Spaniard, but
more reasonable, and perhaps less hypocritical. The Turk, much more
respectful toward the Christian woman, argues that he is not God and
cannot force her to become a Muslim:
¿Tengo yo a cargo tu alma,
o soy Dios para inclinalla,
o ya de hecho llevalla
donde alcance eterna palma?
Vive tú a tu parecer
[Am I in charge of your soul,
or am I God that I can sway it,
or indeed carry it
where it may reach eternal reward?
Live according to your own beliefs.]32
The Turkish king of La gran sultana keeps a freer relation with the
Christian woman because he does not feel bound by the code of honour
and lives less pressured by blood purity. Besides, not only does he not
mind that the Christian woman prays to God and the Virgin, but he
even encourages her to do so because the hybridity that occurs in
places like Constantinople or Algiers momentarily breaks the
boundaries between Christians and Moors. The appearance of hybrid
characters in religious and cultural terms, people who have been one
thing or the other, or both at the same time—a Christian who became a
Moor, a Moor who became a Christian, a renegade; and the use of a
common language that ‘ni es morisca, ni castellana, ni de otra nación
alguna, sino una mezcla de todas las lenguas, con la cual todos nos
entendemos’ [is neither Moorish nor Castilian, nor from any other
nation, but rather a mixture of all the languages with which we all
understand one another]33—makes the relations more complex
between the different communities that share this space.
Up to this point, I have mainly been discussing Cervantes’s portrayal
of the Turks, but how are Christians represented in these plays?
Cervantes’s strategy consists of confronting the reader with the
contradiction implicit in the deployment of multiple passages of a
marked Christian orthodoxy in which dialogues, behaviours, and
circumstances are inserted that are not only inconsistent with said
orthodoxy, but actually subvert it. In my opinion, with these
vacillations and ambivalences, Cervantes tries to disarticulate, through
irony, the vane ideals imposed by the absolutist monarchical ideology:
honour, blood purity, and excessive religious orthodoxy. As we will see
in these four plays, the idea is to try to counter such ideals with the
crude reality of life or with the hypocrisy of human behaviour. In this
sense, this kind of theatre allows for Christians to see themselves as the
Other might see them: deceitful, arrogant, and hypocritical.
Already, from the beginning of La gran sultana, Cervantes makes fun
of the blood purity ideology and the excessive Christian zeal exhibited
by Madrigal (gracioso/jester) when he states that he is Spanish ‘sin
duda’ [without a doubt], meaning pure-blooded Christian, and then
adds: ‘Y soylo, y soylo / lo he sido y lo seré mientras que viva, / y aun
después de ser muerto ochenta siglos’ [And so I am, and so I am; / and
so I’ve been and I will be so long as I live, / even after I’ve been dead
for eighty centuries].34 But the ambiguities and ambivalences to which
I have been referring are best shown in the attitude of characters like
the sultana, Zayda, and Zelinda. While for the entire play we have seen
a constant refusal by the sultana Catalina de Oviedo to mix her
Christian blood with the Turk, which has led her to consider very
seriously the possibility of becoming a martyr, we suddenly find her
embellishing herself so that the ‘abominable infidel’ can enjoy her
charms. Her father reproaches her saying that it is not good Christian
behaviour to accept the marriage offer from the Turk—especially
without torture—and that doing so would be a ‘pecado mortal’ [mortal
sin].35 She replies stating that at least she has the consolation of the
fact that the infidel has allowed her to remain a Christian.
However, after all this insistence on orthodoxy, we may wonder if it
would not have been more Christian to refuse such relations, keeping
her blood purity, and die as a true martyr if need be, as in fact does
another character in Los baños when he refuses to renounce his faith?
This is definitely not possible, because the dilemma is as follows:
Catalina cannot escape, and she cannot commit suicide because, as her
father tells her, this would be counter to God’s law. Nor is she allowed
to die as a martyr for her faith, since the Sultan is not going to kill her
even if she does not agree to his proposals, determined as he is to enjoy
her. Her only alternative, therefore, is to marry the sultan and keep her
honour and her faith. Thus Cervantes has orchestrated everything so
that Catalina remains alive, keeps her Christian faith, marries the Moor,
and is able to give him a ‘Spanish Ottoman’. This child, as Mariscal
argues, is a head-on attack against the notion of blood purity, dogma,
and the idea of nation that the absolutist state is trying to promote:
[It] strikes at the very heart of ideologies of purity. In a single stroke it
problematizes rigid categories of religion, nation, and ethnicity, and
proposes a by no means undesirable (in the logic of this particular
comedia) cultural and genetic synthesis. Cervantes was probably not
lobbying for mixed marriages, yet his text forced contemporary readers
to think about them as a tolerable fact of life.36
With this episode, Cervantes, if not quite promoting racial mixing,
suggests it should be accepted and tolerated, and must be seen as a
common occurrence not only in Constantinople, but also—like it or not
—as something that happens every day in the Iberian peninsula.
Furthermore, in La gran sultana Cervantes attacks the forbidding
nature of the Spanish code of honour when he has the Turkish king say
to her: ‘no eres mía, tuya eres’ [You are not mine; you are yours].37
This inversion is not in keeping with the view of Spanish society
according to which the authoritarian husband must play the role of
safeguard of honour and virtue for both himself and his wife.
Moreover, the Turk wishes to make her a ‘señora, / por subir el bien de
punto’ [señora / to heighten her honour and standing]38 when he could
just enjoy her by force as a slave (and this situation is repeated in El
trato and in Los baños). In this manner he further suggests that the
Turk’s idea of virtue is very similar to that of a Christian, as illustrated
in the following passage: ‘el Amor, /…/ teniéndome por su esclavo / no
me deja ser señor’ [Love, /…/ by keeping me as his slave, / does not let
me be señor].39 Also, the Turk adopts a kind of discourse that is typical
of Christian missionaries—and appears for example in Guzmán de
Alfarache—when he points to the conflict between (liberatory) reason
and (enslaving) desire. Therefore, the Moor-Christian roles are
inverted, and one can see the former through the eyes of the latter and
vice versa, thus breaking any notion of an intrinsic cultural centrality.
El trato de Argel
Already, in El trato de Argel, Cervantes criticizes the greed of Muslims
who buy and sell and effectively speculate with human lives. But here
are the same defects ascribed to Christians, as expressed by Slave 1º in
El trato:
[Esclavo] 1º: que mis ancianos padres, que son muertos,
y un hermano que tengo se ha entregado
en la hacienda y bienes que dejaron,
el cual es tan avaro, que, aunque sabe
la esclavitud amarga que padezco,
no quiere dar, para librarme della,
un real de mi mismo patrimonio
[My elderly parents have died,
and a brother of mine is dedicated to
the estate and the assets that they left,
and he is so stingy that, though he knows
the bitter slavery I suffer,
he refuses to give, in order to free me from it,
a single real from my own inheritance.]40
If the Jew in La gran sultana is the one who insults the Christian by
calling him ‘dog’ and ‘devil’ because, according to the emblematic
tradition, he spits like a salamander,41 in El trato, the Moorish king
insults the Spaniard in Arabic, saying: ‘¡Cito cifuti breguedi!’, i.e. ‘¡Shut
up, you cuckolded Jew!’42 rather than ‘cuckolded Christian’ as one
would expect. In other words, seeing him as an infidel, the Moor insults
the Christian using the same word that the Christian uses to insult the
Other Jew. Even though Schevill and Bonilla inform us that these
words were often used to refer to any infidel, we could argue, as
Castillo and Spadaccini have—following in part De Armas Wilson—
that: ‘Here Cervantes deploys interlinguistic hybridization to parody
the Christian imperialist discourse or master narrative which
assimilates Jews, Moors, and Indians into a mythical image of
otherness.’43 The Moor returns the Christian’s own prejudices back to
him when he asks: ‘¿Almas tenéis los cristianos?’ [So you Christians
have souls?].44 But it is in the next passage where one can most clearly
appreciate the corrosive power of Cervantes’s irony. The pirate Mamí
makes fun of the importance that honour has among Christian Spanish
noblemen sailing the Mediterranean when they allow themselves to be
caught, robbed, and made captive by pirates in order to avoid the
degradation of rowing. Mamí says:
Pero allá tiene la honra
el cristiano en tal estremo,
que asir en un trance el remo
le parece que es deshonra;
y, mientras ellos allá
en sus trece están honrados,
nosotros, dellos cargados,
venimos sin honra acá
[But over there Christians hold
their honour in such esteem
that taking the oars in need
seems to them a great dishonour;
and while over there they keep
stubbornly full of honour,
we come with shiploads of them
over here, without honour.]45
The Moor appears to be much shrewder and boasts about not being
constrained by such a vacuous and silly notion of social identification
as honour. The Mercader 1º (First Merchant) voices his selfish wish
that, in the Spaniard
Esa honra y ese engaño
nunca salga de su pecho,
pues nuestro mayor provecho
nace de su propio daño
[May this honour and this deceit
never come out of his bosom,
because our highest profit
comes from its own harm.]46
Cervantes equates ‘honour’ with ‘deceit’ and ‘harm’. It is clear for him
that this excess or extreme zeal about such notions as honour is rather
a deception and leads to inaction. He is therefore documenting the
social reality of the victims who suffer in their own selves the pressures
of the code of honour. Clearly and categorically, Cervantes is criticizing
the code of honour as an alienating mechanism.
Los baños de Argel
In this third part I will mention some examples of this kind of
ambivalence in Los baños de Argel. Los baños stages the captivity of a
group of Spaniards and the love vicissitudes of don Lope, a captive
from Spain, and Zahara, a Moorish woman, who are the main
characters in this play. Cervantes creates a strange series of situations
and circumstances that bring forward these paradoxes or ambivalences,
and through them he dismantles the sterile constructs that forge the
social identity of his time. Here, the Moorish woman is in charge of
giving genuine faith lessons to the nobleman don Lope. When he kneels
at her feet, like a slave, and asks the infidel to be allowed to kiss her
hands, which would initiate an absolutely forbidden relationship, she
responds:
‘No es bien que se descompongan
con moras labios cristianos.
Por mil señales has visto
cómo yo toda soy tuya,
no por ti, sino por Cristo;
y así, en fe de que soy suya,
estas caricias resisto
[It is not a good thing to undo
Christian lips with Moorish women.
You have seen a thousand signs
that I am all yours,
not for you, but for Christ,
and thus, to prove that I am his,
these caresses I resist.]47
The woman indicates that, since she wants to become a Christian, she
will accept the love, but not the caresses, of a Christian man, since this
would mean making him sin. The irony of the situation is that the
Moorish woman sees herself from the point of view of a Christian, and
degrades herself. She loves don Lope as a Christian, not as a Moor, and
that is the reason she respects him. However, as don Lope insists in
wanting to have her hand, Zahara replies: ‘No, sino dame tus pies, /
que eres cristiano y yo mora’ [No, but rather give me your feet, / since
you are a Christian and I am a Moor].48
The entire passage shows a contradiction between faith and purity of
blood: the first has to do with will power, the second with origins. This
is to say that from the perspective of faith, she is a Christian, but from
the perspective of blood purity, she is a Moor. Therefore, with this
example, Cervantes opens a breach and highlights the contradiction
within the official discourse, where both notions tend to get confused.
Zahara, who ironically has paid don Lope to bring her to Spain to get
baptized—in addition to paying for his ransom—is putting herself in
the position of an inferior, the position of a slave to the captive
Spaniard. Christianity must dominate Islam. But it is frankly surprising
that it should be Islam, personified by the Moorish woman, which gives
lessons in faith to the Spaniard. Is this not another wink to the reader
by Cervantes?
Djadri has expressed it in a different manner, highlighting the
tolerance that Moors show toward Christians, both in Los Baños and in
La gran sultana, and emphasizing Cervantes’s critique of the notion of
blood purity:
We can see through this perspective that the movement to friendship or
love, or even to the opening of new horizons, other men, other lands, is
made once again from the Muslim character toward the Christian one…
This being so, could we not say that somehow Cervantes is criticizing,
in this roundabout fashion, the spirit of caste and blood, the separatist
spirit of the Spaniards of his time, completely averse to any opening
toward the outside?49
Finally, I will quote the crudest example of Cervantes’s critique of
orthodoxy and the ideal of blood purity in this play, a case that borders
on the absurd. Francisquito has been martyred for refusing to accept
Islam and keeping his Christian name. His father, el Viejo, finds him,
tied to a pillar and bleeding ‘en la forma que pueda mover a más
piedad’ [in a manner that can move one to the utmost pity].50
Francisquito then implores his father to untie him so that he can die
lying down or sitting ‘como es costumbre espirar’ [as it is customary to
expire].51 However, his father refuses to do as he asks; he will not help
him and untie him because, he says, in this way Francisquito imitates
Christ better and will make a better martyr: ‘Si vas caminando al cielo,
/ no has de sentarte en el suelo; / más ligero vas ansí’ [If you are
walking to heaven, / you must not sit on the floor; / you will go faster
this way].52 When finally his father runs away and gets on a boat for
Spain, he carries with him the remains of his son in a bloodied cloth,
referring to them as ‘reliquias santas’ [holy relics].53 Casalduero thinks
that this is a beautiful scene of pity and devotion: ‘The Father,
embracing the pillar where his Son is dying, is centuplicating in a
beautiful gesture the moving power of sacrifice’.54 However, I interpret
the exaggeration present in the episode, based on the crucifixion of
Christ, as leading one to understand it in a parodic, almost ridiculous
fashion. After the tragedy of his martyrdom, it seems rather outlandish
that a father and his son should be found discussing whether or not the
latter should die sitting down ‘as it is customary to expire’. In other
words, by framing such a pious moment in this exaggerated and crude
manner, where the father increases his son’s pain and quickens his
death, the sacrifice is completely trivialized, inspiring almost a sense of
mockery rather than devotion. Certainly, examples such as the ones
analysed in this work are the ones that Cervantes wished his readers to
see ‘slowly’ and examine them carefully in the reading or
representation of his plays.
La conquista de Jerusalén
Along these lines, the second act of La conquista de Jerusalén stages an
important conflict of faith, along with an insult on blood purity; during
a conversation between Boemundo and Tancredo, two of the crusade
princes, Boemundo is surprised by Tancredo’s tolerance and uncommon
restraint while with the beautiful Moorish protagonist Erminia.
Tancredo explains solemnly and harshly to Boemundo that honour and
faith have restrained his impulse, that is, ‘cumplir con lo que debe a
caballero / y aquello [a] que le obliga ser cristiano’ [to abide by what a
gentleman should do / and that which a Christian is obliged to do].55
He adds that if she were Catholic, he would have had no objection to
seducing her:
Si ella fuera bautizada creo
que nunca yo mostrara los estremos
de continencia y liberal que dices;
mas la pérfida seta que ella guarda
fue causa [que] de Erminia me guardase
[If she were baptized, I believe
I would have never shown such extreme
tolerance and restraint that you speak of;
but the deceitful sect she holds
caused me to restrain myself from Erminia.]56
Nevertheless, the honourable and sanctimonious Tancredo soon will
become enamoured of another Moorish girl, in this case the beautiful
Clorinda, to whom it seems he shows no restraint. He desires to make
her a prisoner of love and war—‘la cautivaré’ [I’ll captivate her]—, and
conquer her love with power—‘no usaré la cortesía’ [I’ll exercise no
courtesy]—, expressing:
y allí rindirá el amor,
con la potencia en que estriba,
el señor a la cautiva,
no la cautiva al señor
[and there, love will conquer,
with its great power
and a man will captivate her,
not she will captivate the man.]57
However, this is not to say the protagonist does not realize or question
his irreverent and sinful behaviour ‘¡Ay, mal nacido deseo’ [Oh, cursed
desire!].58 On the contrary, Cervantes shows this through Tancredo’s
explicit conflict of faith in passages such as the following:
¡Deja, miserable, deja
aquel bien que se te aleja
más cuanto lo sigues más!
Su pie por la senda ruin
de Mahoma va muy listo,
el tuyo por la de Cristo.
¡Mira si es contrario al fin:
dame ser los dos temor,
de tan diferentes greyes!
Mas lo que apartan las leyes
suele juntar el amor.
[Stop, wretch, stop
oh goodness that leaves
the more you desire it!
Her foot, on the despicable path
of Mohammed, is ready,
and yours on the path to Christ.
See if she is an enemy in the end:
Oh the fear of both being
from such different flocks!
But that which the law separates
tends to join in love.]59
As shown in the last two verses, human fragility provoked by desire
and love is precisely what is imposed on dogma, a common theme
explored in the rest of Cervantes’s works of captivity.
Another important example occurs at the beginning of the third act.
The soldiers Charles and Fabricio are discussing the crusade and during
this exchange, Charles expresses his happiness. When Fabricio asks why
he is so overjoyed, the answer is quite revealing: ‘El ser esta jornada
diferente / de cualquier otra, qu’ésta es santa y justa, / las demás llenas
de ambición y envidia’ [As this war day is different / from any other,
for it’s holy and just, / the other [war days] are filled with ambition
and envy].60 Labelling this war as ‘the only holy and just one’ appears
to be an unnecessary exaggeration, although typical of Cervantes, as it
plants ambiguity and forces the public to read between the lines. At the
very least, it plants doubt surrounding not only this ‘holy war’, but all
of ‘the other [wars] fuelled by ambition and envy’. From a critical
standpoint, the passage shows, perhaps, distrust in war and postulates a
self-criticism with respect to the motivations of the battles Christians
have fought up until this point.
In sum, in La gran sultana, El trato de Argel, Los baños de Argel, and La
conquista de Jerusalén the zones of contact between Moors and
Christians become the stages of human dramas that end up revealing
the absurd nature of the social fantasies that distance us from the
Other. 
The 
ambivalence, 
the 
ambiguity, 
the 
appearance 
of
simultaneously contrary ideas, and the irony that at times show up in
Cervantes’s plays take us away from the official orthodoxy—in many
instances propagated by Lope’s comedia nueva—by proposing the
defence of human integrity, virtue, and understanding. In these dramas,
we see intertwined passions, beliefs, and attitudes that range from
antipathy to sympathy. Generally, desire is the common denominator,
which, if not destroying dogmatic attitudes completely, at least
suspends them momentarily. Therefore, as in Don Quixote, the point is
to move the reader towards a humanism that attacks dogmas and
absolute certainties, one that criticizes the short-sightedness of
essentialism and denounces religious and cultural intransigence.
Works Cited
Arata, Stefano. ‘La conquista de Jerusalén, Cervantes y la generación teatral de
1580’. Criticón 54 (1992): pp. 9–112.
Aguilar Piñal, Francisco. ‘Cervantes en el siglo XVIII’. Anales Cervantinos XXI
(1983): pp. 153–63.
Bataillon, Marcel. Erasmo y España: Estudios sobre la historia espiritual del Siglo
XVI (México: Fondo de Cultura Económica, 1966).
Canavaggio, Jean. Cervantes (Madrid: Espasa Calpe, 1986).
Canavaggio, Jean. Cervantès dramaturge: un théâtre à naître (Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France, 1977).
Casalduero, Joaquín. Sentido y forma del teatro de Cervantes (Madrid: Aguilar,
1951).
Castillo, David R. (A)wry Views: Anamorphosis, Cervantes, and the Early
Picaresque PSRL 23 (West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University Press, 2001).
Castillo, David, and Nicholas Spadaccini. ‘Cervantes and the Culture Wars’. In
Cervantes and His Postmodern Constituencies, edited by Anne J. Cruz and
Carroll B. Johnson, Hispanic Issues 17 (New York and London: Garland,
1999), pp. 248–59.
Castillo, Moisés R. ‘Espacios de ambigüedad en el teatro cervantino: La conquista
de Jerusalén y los dramas de cautiverio’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes
Society of America 32, no. 2 (2012): pp. 123–42.
Castillo, Moisés R. Indios en escena: La representación del amerindio en el teatro del
Siglo de Oro, PSRL 48 (West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University Press, 2009).
Castillo, Moisés R. ‘¿Ortodoxia cervantina?: Un análisis de La gran sultana, El
trato de Argel y Los baños de Argel’. Bulletin of the Comediantes 56, no. 2
(2004): pp. 219–40.
Castro, Américo. El pensamiento de Cervantes (Barcelona: Noguer, 1972).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Comedias y entremeses, edited by Rodolfo Schevill and
Adolfo Bonilla, 6 vols (Madrid: Bernardo Rodríguez, 1915–22).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Comedias y tragedias, edited and coordinated by Luis
Gómez Canseco, 2 vols (Madrid: Real Academia Española, 2015).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Don Quijote de la Mancha, edited by John Jay Allen, 2 vols
(Madrid: Cátedra, 2010, 2003).
Cervantes, Miguel de (atribuida). La conquista de Jerusalén por Godofre de Bullón,
edited by Héctor Brioso Santos (Madrid: Cátedra, 2009).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Obras completas III, Trato de Argel, Numancia, Ocho
comedias y ocho entremeses, Viaje del Parnaso, Poesía suelta, edited by Florecio
Sevilla Arroyo (Guanajuato: Museo Iconográfico del Quijote, 2013).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Teatro completo, edited, introduction, and notes by
Florencio Sevilla Arroyo and Antonio Rey Hazas (Barcelona: Planeta, 1987).
Cotarelo Valledor, Armando. El teatro de Cervantes (Madrid: Tipografía de la
Revista de Archivos, Bibliotecas y Museos, 1915).
Díaz de Escobar, Narciso. Apuntes escénicos cervantinos o sea un estudio histórico,
bibliográfico y biográfico de las comedias y entremeses escritos por Miguel de
Cervantes Saavedra (Madrid: Librería de la viuda de Rico, 1905).
Djadri, Khadidja Zerroug. Argel en la obra de Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra:
Estudio de El trato de Argel, Los baños de Argel, El cautivo (Don Quijote cap. 39–
40–41), Disertación (Argel: Université d’Alger, 1980).
Friedman, Edward H. The Unifying Concept: Approaches to the Structure of
Cervantes’s Comedias (York, SC: Spanish Literature Publications, 1981).
Granja, Agustín de la. ‘Apogeo, decadencia y estimación de las comedias de
Cervantes’. In Cervantes, edited by Anthony Close et. al. (Alcalá de Henares:
Centro de Estudios Cervantinos, 1995), pp. 225–54.
Johnson, Carroll B. ‘La Numancia y la estructura de la ambigüedad cervantina’.
In Cervantes: Su obra y su mundo, edited by Manuel Criado de Val (Madrid:
EDI-6, 1981), pp. 309–16.
Maestro, Jesús G. El teatro de Miguel de Cervantes ante el IV Centenario, Theatralia
5, (Pontevedra: Mirabel Editorial, 2003).
Maestro, Jesús G. La escena imaginaria: Poética del teatro de Miguel de Cervantes
(Madrid and Frankfurt: Iberoamericana, Vervuert, 2000).
Mariscal, George. ‘La gran sultana and the Issue of Cervantes’s Modernity’.
Revista de Estudios Hispánicos 28, no. 2 (1994): pp. 185–211.
Marrast, Robert. Miguel de Cervantès dramaturge (París: L’Arche, 1957).
Ojeda Calvo, María del Valle. ‘Antes del Arte Nuevo: El teatro de Cervantes’. In
XXIV Coloquio Cervantino Internacional. Cervantes dramaturgo y poeta, edited
by Florencio Sevilla Arroyo (Guanajuato: Centro de Estudios Cervantinos,
2014), pp. 57–93.
Rey Hazas, Antonio. ‘Cervantes y el teatro’. Cuadernos de Teatro Clásico 20
(2005): pp. 21–98.
Rey Hazas, Antonio. ‘Las comedias de cautivos de Cervantes’. In Los imperios
orientales en el teatro del Siglo de Oro, edited by Felipe Pedraza Jiménez and
Rafael González Cañal (Almagro: Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha, 1994),
pp. 29–56.
Rey Hazas, Antonio and Juan Ramón Muñoz Sánchez. El nacimiento del
cervantismo: Cervantes y el Quijote en el siglo XVIII (Madrid: Verbum, 2006).
Sánchez, Alberto. ‘Aproximación al teatro de Cervantes’. Cuadernos de Teatro
Clásico 7 (1992): pp. 11–30.
Spadacinni, Nicholas and Jenaro Talens. Through the Shattering Glass: Cervantes
and the Self-Made World (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1993).
Stackhouse, Kenneth A. ‘Beyond Performance: Cervantes’s Algerian Plays, El
trato de Argel and Los baños de Argel’. Bulletin of the Comediantes 52, no. 2
(2000): pp. 7–30.
Valbuena Prat, Ángel. El teatro español en su Siglo de Oro (Barcelona: Planeta,
1969).
Vilanova, Antonio. Erasmo y Cervantes (Barcelona: Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas, 1949).
Wardropper, Bruce. ‘Cervantes’s Theory of the Drama’. Modern Philology 52, no.
4 (1955): pp. 217–21.
Yndurain, Francisco. ‘Cervantes y el teatro’. Estudio preliminar a su edición de
Obras de Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra. II Obras dramáticas (Madrid: Atlas,
1962), ‘Biblioteca de Autores españoles’, no. 156, pp. vii–lxxvii.
Zimic, Stanislav. El teatro de Cervantes (Madrid: Castalia, 1992).
Zimic, Stanislav. ‘Sobre la clasificación de las comedias de Cervantes’. Acta
Neophilológica 14 (1981): pp. 63–83.
1 This essay is in part an extension and re-elaboration of two articles
published in Spanish in 2004 and 2012.
2 Arata, p. 9.
3 Cervantes, Obras completas, p. 645; all citations from Cervantes’s theatrical
works come from this edition unless otherwise noted.
4 All quotations have been translated by the author of this chapter.
5 See Friedman and Zimic, ‘Sobre…’.
6 Stackhouse, pp. 22–4.
7 Cervantes, Don Quijote I.48, p. 626.
8 In ‘Aprobación’, the prologue to Blas Antonio Nasarre Férriz’s 1732 edition
of Avellaneda’s Quixote, both he and Agustín Montiano Luyando indicate that
this apocryphal text offered more literary value than the second part of
Cervantes’s Don Quixote. Additionally, they classified Cervantine theatre as a
premeditated mockery of Lope that sought to point out his works’ countless
defects, absurdity, and nonsense. In the Introduction to his edition of Comedias
and Entremeses of Miguel de Cervantes (1749), Nasarre is the first to praise
Cervantes’s drama for more closely resembling the neoclassical precept than the
works of Lope and Calderón, whom he refers to as corruptors of the genre.
However, what he presents as praise is in fact a criticism of Cervantes’s theatre,
pointing out its untapped potential and lamenting its suffocation at the hands of
his famous contemporaries who excluded it from the stage by imposing their
own theatrical aesthetic. According to Nasarre, Cervantes was the best of these
dramatists. And yet, because he was marginalized, he decided not to write as he
knew how to; rather, he used irony to mock and denigrate his fellow
playwrights, Lope in particular. In this sense, he writes: ‘staging the same
foolishness, Cervantes skillfully revealed, like painters of the hideous and the
atrocious do, the chaos, the ridiculousness, and the utter lack of art, invention,
and authenticity, or good morals, that the people, deceived, took for things to
be admired’ (Nasarre, quoted in Rey Hazas and Muñoz Sánchez, p. 51). Moratín
dismissed Cervantine theatre as well. See Sánchez and Aguilar Piñal.
9 It is worth mentioning the studies by Díaz de Escobar; Cotarelo Valledor;
Schevill and Bonilla’s editions of Cervantes’s works; Casalduero; Marrast;
Yndurain; Valbuena Prat; Canavaggio, Cervantès dramaturge…, Cervantes…;
Friedman; Sevilla Arroyo and Rey Hazas’s edition of Cervantes’s theatre; Zimic,
El teatro…; Maestro, La escena…, El teatro…; Gómez Canseco’s edition of
Cervantes’s theatre.
10 Don Quixote II.11, p. 105.
11 Cervantes, Obras completas, pp. 144 and 145. All quotations from
Cervantes’s theatrical works come from this edition.
12 Sánchez, pp. 29–30, and Ojeda Calvo, pp. 69–71.
13 Granja, p. 226.
14 Rey Hazas, ‘Cervantes…’, p. 44, p. 48.
15 I concur with Jesús Maestro’s observation that Cervantine theatre,
including Cervantes’s tragedy and entremeses, ‘expresses convincingly the
complexity and authenticity of real life, giving specific attention to the human
experience during decisive moments of its evolution’ (La escena…, p. 12).
Maestro also argues that, underlying Cervantes’s treatment of language,
characters, and action, there are certain formal and functional characteristics
that are considered foundations of contemporary dramaturgy (La escena…, p.
18).
16 Rey Hazas and Muñoz Sánchez, p. 51.
17 Spadaccini and Talens, p. 170.
18 Castillo, David R., p. 122.
19 See Casalduero, Friedman, and Rey Hazas, ‘Las comedias…’.
20 Wardropper, p. 218.
21 Johnson, p. 316.
22 On how the Amerindian is represented in the comedia of the Golden Age,
see Castillo, Moisés R., Indios en escena.
23 Cervantes, La gran sultana, I.190–7.
24 Cervantes, La gran sultana I.443, 456.
25 Cervantes, La gran sultana, II.1672.
26 Cervantes, La gran sultana II.1289, 1299.
27 Cervantes, La gran sultana III. 2542, 2544.
28 Cervantes, La gran sultana II.1291.
29 Djadri, p. 137.
30 Cervantes, La gran sultana, II.1209, 1214–17.
31 Cervantes, La gran sultana, II.1221.
32 Cervantes, La gran sultana, II.1242–6.
33 Cervantes, Don Quijote I.41, p. 546.
34 Cervantes, La gran sultana, I.522–4.
35 Cervantes, La gran sultana, III.2012.
36 Mariscal, p. 201.
37 Cervantes, La gran sultana, II.1324.
38 Cervantes, La gran sultana, II.1284–5.
39 Cervantes, La gran sultana, III.2222–5.
40 Cervantes, El trato de Argel, III, vv. 1545–51.
41 Cervantes, La gran sultana, I.456–8.
42 Cervantes, El trato de Argel, IV.2352.
43 Castillo and Spadaccini, p. 255.
44 Cervantes, El trato de Argel, I.169.
45 Cervantes, El trato de Argel, II.851–8.
46 Cervantes, El trato de Argel, II.859–62.
47 Cervantes, Los baños de Argel, III.2683–9.
48 Cervantes, Los baños de Argel, III.2753–4.
49 Djadri, pp. 170–1.
50 Cervantes, Los baños de Argel, p. 277; this is the stage direction after
III.2554.
51 Cervantes, Los baños de Argel, III.2557.
52 Cervantes, Los baños de Argel, III.2560–2.
53 Cervantes, Los baños de Argel, III.3013.
54 Casalduero, p. 102.
55 Cervantes, La conquista de Jerusalén, II.713–14; quotes from this play come
from the edition by Brioso Santos.
56 Cervantes, La conquista de Jerusalén, II.693–7.
57 Cervantes, La conquista de Jerusalén, II.1320–7.
58 Cervantes, La conquista de Jerusalén, II.1290.
59 Cervantes, La conquista de Jerusalén, II.1293–303.
60 Cervantes, La conquista de Jerusalén, III.1336–8.
Chapter 19
Versification in Cervantes’s Drama
Kathleen Jeffs
Gonzaga University
We know that the author of Don Quixote was a captivating storyteller
whose works are full of winks and nods, labyrinths, and blind alleys,
but was his poetry any good? As Domínguez Caparrós writes, most
discussions about Cervantine verse revolve around the question of
whether he was a good poet or not, and these comments date to the
time of Cervantes’s own critics.1 Critics writing during this period
include Fernando de Herrera (Anotaciones, 1580), Juan Díaz Rengifo
(Arte poética española, 1592), Alonso López Pinciano (Filosofía antigua
poética, 1596), and Gonzalo Correas (Arte de la lengua española, 1626).
Many writers who praise Cervantes’s prose are just as effusive in their
criticism of his verse. This negative opinion has led to a dearth of
studies of his verse, in comparison to the other aspects of his oeuvre.2
But the aficionado of Cervantine writing and its idiosyncrasies need
not despair. There is a wealth of ingenuity in his verse, as a fan of his
work will expect there to be. His innovations include forms that
Domínguez Caparrós terms ‘artificiosas’; they may have been invented
by Cervantes, or at least he may have composed well-known examples
of them.3 He makes somewhat less use than other playwrights of some
forms that may be better known (such as the six mentioned by Lope de
Vega in his Arte nuevo de hacer comedias en este tiempo [The New Art of
Writing Plays in This Time]), in that he adheres more closely to the
complexities of medieval verse. While the plays of Lope, Tirso, and
later, Calderón, modernized their use of verse and kept to the more
popular native Spanish and imported Italian verses, Cervantes employs
the whole gamut of strophes and coplas, including choices like lexaprén
and perqué, zéjel, and canción medieval, which were somewhat less
common with later playwrights4 (Lope de Vega tended to use the
redondilla as his foundational form, whereas Calderón’s ‘basic’ form was
the romance).5
This study focuses on the use of polymetric verse in Cervantes’s
drama. Cervantes wrote both full-length plays and entremeses, and
published some of them in his Ocho comedias y ocho entremeses nuevos,
nunca representados of 1615. He also wrote plays that are not included
in that collection, two of which survive and which were performed in
Madrid: El cerco de Numancia and El trato de Argel, which was probably
his first play. In 1992 Stefano Arata published an edition of La
conquista de Jerusalén, which is thought to be the third of Cervantes’s
plays from this time that has survived to the twenty-first century.
A landmark study of Cervantes’s dramatic writing was undertaken
by Schevill and Bonilla along with an edition of his complete works,
which included an analysis with the edited plays (1922). Scholars on
the subject of Spanish versification include Navarro Tomás and Baehr,
and the works that consider Cervantes’s versification include those of
Rojas, Blecua, and Domínguez Caparrós.
Golden Age dramatists wrote their comedias almost exclusively in
polymetric verse. They used the form they judged most suitable to the
characters, theme, mood, or tone of each section of their plays. Lope de
Vega advised in his Arte nuevo:
[versos sueltos]
Acomode los versos con prudencia
a los sujetos de que va tratando.
Las décimas son buenas para quejas;
el soneto está bien en los que aguardan;
las relaciones piden los romances,
aunque en octavas lucen por extremo;
son los tercetos para cosas graves,
y para las de amor, las redondillas.6
[Suit your verses prudently
to the subjects that they treat.
Décimas are good for complaints;
the sonnet suits those who wait alone;
narratives call for romances,
though in octaves they also shine.
Tercets are for grave matters,
and for matters of love, redondillas.]7
This advice was not followed strictly or exclusively, not even by Lope
himself, but it is helpful to guide the reader and listener/spectator of
Spanish dramatic polymetry in the basics of why and how verse
changes occur. The most exciting thing about the way Cervantes
employed the medium is the variety of forms he was able to use for
different effects. In his influential 1985 article, Dixon connected the
aural and structural functions of verse-change:
The author would start each new salida—with rare exceptions—in a
new verse form. But within the salida he would often change metres
again, not (unless coincidentally) at the entry or exit of a character, but
to modify significantly…the aural impact of the verse. The successive
passages in different metres and stanza forms are indeed, I submit, the
true (sub)-escenas, micro-secuencias, or building-blocks of the play; the
poetic structure of a comedia coincides with, is its dramatic structure,
and to clarify one can only illuminate the other.8
Recent works by Vitse, Antonucci, and Güell investigate the structural
function of verse forms in the plays of Lope de Vega and others.9 Most
studies separate their analysis into two areas: treatments of Spanish
verse, including the romance [a ballad], the redondilla, the quintilla, and
the décima, all of which are written in lines of eight syllables each
(Cervantes also wrote in romancillos, octavillas de pie quebrado, and
seguidillas, among other Spanish forms); and Italianate verses (normally
eleven or seven syllables per line), which were imported in the
sixteenth century, take a variety of forms later seen in drama as
tercetos, octavas reales, the sonnet, versos sueltos, the silva, and the lira.
Thacker writes, ‘Garcilaso de la Vega and Juan Boscán had been
encouraged by their friend Castiglione, in the 1520s and 1530s, to
experiment in Spanish with forms such as the Petrarchan sonnet, and
their poetry was much imitated’.10 The Italianate lines of eleven
syllables carry a stress on either the sixth or on the fourth and eighth.
All are used in rhyming patterns, except the versos sueltos, although
even these may include rhyming couplets [pareados], especially at the
conclusion of a sequence.
Such patterns are evident to the reader of Cervantes’s plays, but,
‘[w]hat is harder to recover is the Golden Age audience’s apparent
ability to hear changes in metre and form and thus be sensitive to the
shifts of mood and other subtleties that came with them’.11 The social
and educational stratification of the Golden Age theatre-going audience
meant that some of the hearers would be attuned to each shift and
change, while many others might have been more attracted to the fast-
paced plots and cross-dressed actresses showing off their legs in men’s
breeches. It might be a cliché to say that there was something for
everyone in the complex plays on stage during the seventeenth century,
but when an actor paused to deliver a sonnet, alone on stage as if
giving an aria in an opera, members of the audience would vary greatly
in their appreciation of the quatrains, tercets, and philosophical
reflections contained in the compact medium of the sonnet’s
versification.12 Cervantes was both an innovator and an imitator during
his writing career; some of his versification is unique to him, some of it
a tongue-in-cheek parody of his contemporaries. In order to consider
Cervantes’s dramatic verse, it will be helpful first to look at verse-
change in one of his plays, and then to examine several particular
examples, following the tradition of studying first the native Spanish
verse-forms, and thereafter those imported from Italy.
Analysis of verse-change: Pedro de
Urdemalas
Pedro de Urdemalas intrigued producers and directors at the Royal
Shakespeare Company and was performed in English translation in
2004–5 as part of their Spanish Golden Age season. This play, with a
protean trickster as titular character and guide through its episodic
structure, offers the reader and spectator a glimpse of Cervantes’s
polysemic art, as he plays with the boundaries between art,
performance, and identity.13
Cervantes’s play begins with 150 lines of quintillas, in which Pedro
meets a sighing shepherd and his jealous lady-love, Clemencia.14 The
form shifts to octavas reales (151–66) for Clemente to make a lofty
declaration of love, before returning to octosyllables for their
reconciliation, given in three redondillas (167–78). Pedro stays on stage,
but new characters enter: a rural mayor and his aldermen speak in
tercetos (179–209), prepare in quintillas (210–89) to hear a dispute
between two peasants, and then do so in endecasílabos sueltos with a
final pareado (290–360). When Clemente returns with Clemencia, now
veiled, to appear before the court, the metre shifts to octavas reales
(361–75), but to tell the tale of their love, which has incurred the harsh
disapproval of her father, he turns to the six-line liras (sextetos alirados)
of the most common type, aBaBcC, in seven and eleven syllables (376–
435). Pedro dips into the Mayor’s hood to extract the sentence, reading
out a pareado (436–7); the pair are permitted to marry. Only now it is
revealed, in four octavas reales (438–69), that the mayor himself is
Clemencia’s father. The court scene concludes in quintillas, but Pedro
remains on stage, joined by two new characters, Pascual and a sexton,
and though they are also replaced when they leave by another, the
gypsy leader Maldonado, that metre remains unchanged (470–599).
When Pedro embarks, however, on an autobiographical monologue, it
gives way to a passage in romance with an unusual assonance in ‘i’
(600–767). Maldonado listens patiently, then changes the form to ten
lines of endecasílabos sueltos to lavish praise on Pedro’s story and end
the scene in a pareado (768–77). Back to quintillas (778–957) for the
sexton to play a trick on Pascual and his lover Benita; Pedro unravels it
and provides a solution. Clemente reappears with musicians to
celebrate love in a song, ‘The Night of St. John’, in six-syllable
romancillos (958–98). Clemente speaks four quintillas (999–1018), and
Benita, Pascual, and he, in ten lines in endecasílabos sueltos ending with
a pareado (1019–28), call for a different song, a seguidilla with a glosa
(1029–52). In the final scene of the act, given wholly in quintillas
(1053–232), the location of the action then shifts to the gypsy territory
where Pedro meets the gypsy-girl Belica and her companion Inés, and
they encounter a rich widow, whom Pedro lays plans to swindle.
Act Two also begins in quintillas (1233–317), with the rustic Mayor’s
plan to introduce an innovation in dancing that is sure to astound all
who see it, namely a troupe of twenty-four male dancers dressed as
females. But the audience has to wait to see them in action, because
first a blind beggar and Pedro (dressed as another) appear beneath the
widow’s window; they pray and converse in octavillas de pie quebrado
(1318–49, 1355–94) interrupted by a single quintilla (1350–4) in which
Pedro introduces his repertoire of prayers. The widow then appears and
Pedro persuades her in quintillas (1395–534) that payments to an
emissary from Purgatory will ensure the liberation of her relatives
there. They clear the stage, replaced by Maldonado and Belica, and the
quintillas continue for a further 200 lines (1535–734) as the action
proceeds with the King and his hunting-party, where the King is struck
with admiration for Belica’s beauty. The location then changes for the
royal court’s visit to the country, given in an extended passage of
redondillas (1735–2126).
Cervantes begins Act Three yet again in quintillas (2127–371), in
which Pedro, disguised as an old hermit, carries out his elaborate plan
to trick the widow into giving him her well-guarded savings. The
location and verse-form then shift for the Queen’s conversation with a
courtier, Marcelo, given in five redondillas (2372–91), in which she
shows him some jewels, which he recognizes as having belonged to her
brother, and in a narrative monologue in romance with assonance in ‘o-
a’ (2392–551), he explains how they passed to that brother’s baby
daughter, who has been brought up by gypsies. The metre shifts to
redondillas (2552–659) when the Queen brings in Belica, and she is
declared to be a long-lost member of the royal family. The location
then shifts to the street as Pedro, now dressed in student garb, discusses
his changeable luck and re-invents himself once again (redondillas,
2660–91). With the assistance of an acting troupe that happens to pass
by, Pedro swindles a farmer out of his chickens in a passage of quintillas
(2692–871). The protean trickster Pedro then gives a remarkable
speech about the nature of acting in a conversation with the theatre
troupe, held in redondillas (2872–959). When their company’s leader
appears, Pedro offers his services (having claimed convincingly to know
what it takes), and they are summoned to perform at court. The
redondillas continue, as they will for the rest of the action (2960–79,
2996–3159), interrupted only by a song (about the King’s infatuation
with Belica, and the jealousy of the Queen) in six-syllable romancillos
(2980–95). All, of course, is happily resolved, and the actors depart to
give their command performance; the offstage audience are not to see
it, but Pedro, addressing them in a final set of endecasílabos sueltos with
a pareado (3160–80), promises them a proper comedia tomorrow.
We may note that, overall, only a small percentage of the play’s lines
are Italianate, and that (apart from Pedro’s speech to the audience at
the end of Act Three) they are used only in Act One (in nine brief
passages, for declarations of love, or to suggest the pretentiousness of
the rustic officials). Among the (mostly octosyllabic) Spanish verse-
forms, quintillas account for almost half of the lines overall, and are
used to begin every act. Redondillas account for a quarter of the total
lines used, though for only twelve lines in Act One. The romance form is
used only twice, for narrative monologues. The verse-form changes
eighteen times in Act One, though only five times in Act Two, and nine
times in Act Three.
In many Golden Age plays, when the stage clears and new characters
enter, a change of verse-form is used to emphasize a shift of place and/
or time. In this play, Cervantes adopts that practice on some occasions,
but not on others; a new form appears at two such moments in Act One
(at lines 778 and 1053), but the stage also empties at lines 244 and
509, when the verse form does not change. The verse changes at two
such points in Act Two—1318 and 1735—but not at 1535 or 1803. In
Act Three, the stage clears and the verse changes at line 2372, but not
at the other times this happens, at lines 2660, 2872, and 2960.
Much can be learned from studying the verse in Pedro de Urdemalas.
With each change, Cervantes deftly signals new locations and moods,
and the verse has the effect of a musical underscore to the action. As
Pedro changes costumes, vocal accents, and re-invents himself time and
again to serve his particular aims in each scene, so does our playwright
apply metres and forms that suit each course of action. There are
octavas for important appeals and trussed-up magistrates; liras for lyrics
on love; songs in romancillos, and autobiographies in romance. The
staple forms, the quintilla and redondilla, do the bulk of the work and
make the more unique forms sound even more special by contrast.
Turning to a selection of examples from Cervantes’s dramatic
writing, more attention can be given to individual forms, and the
choices the writer makes in employing each one.
Verse-forms native to Spain:redondillas,
quintillas, and romance
A commonly used strophe in the comedia of the Golden Age is the
redondilla. This form, with four-line stanzas of eight syllables, rhymes
ABBA and is often used for dialogue and action. Cervantes, with typical
self-awareness, has his quintessential actor, Pedro, address the gypsy-
girl-turned-noblewoman, Belica, creating a moment of theatre in just
four lines:
[redondillas]
PEDRO Yo, farsante, seré rey
cuando le haya en la comedia,
y tú, oyente, ya eres media
reina por valor y ley.15
[PEDRO I an actor shall be king
when I perform one in a scene;
you, watching me, are half a queen,
by your worth and by your breeding.]16
Cervantes compresses the essential elements of theatre into those lines:
the actor, the audience, and their shared complicity in the pretence. By
linking his actor’s trade with the lady’s newfound high social station,
he also makes a jibe at the constructed nature of lineage and hierarchy,
a theme in which his characters and contemporaries are steeped.
Cervantes used eight-syllable lines throughout his plays for many
different dramaturgical purposes. Essentially a five-line redondilla,
another regularly used form is the quintilla, or copla real, which Rengifo
referred to as the copla redondilla until the name quintilla came to be
used to distinguish them. Domínguez Caparrós identifies a quintilla
(copla redondilla) by its rhyme pattern, which can vary: ababa, abaab,
aabab, abbab, and aabba, and there are sometimes variations.17 The
copla real in Cervantes is a pair of two quintillas that often rhyme
ababa:ccddc or aabba:cddcd, and it is used in La Galatea.18
Cervantes’s use of the quintilla and the copla real is frequent in Pedro
de Urdemalas, such as in the very opening lines:
[quintillas]
CLEMENTE De tu ingenio, Pedro amigo,
y nuestra amistad se puede
fiar más de lo que digo,
porque él al mayor excede,
y della el mundo es testigo;
así, que es de calidad
tu ingenio y nuestra amistad,
que, sin buscar otro medio,
en ambos pongo el remedio
de toda mi enfermedad.
[CLEMENTE Ingenious Pedro, between us two
exists a friendship that won’t die;
there is a wiliness in you,
on which I’m sure I can rely;
the whole world knows this to be true!
Your wit and our friendly relations,
how high they rank in my estimation!
And so on them I place my trust
as in my present state I must
to be my succour and salvation.]19
While they are similar in purpose to their close cousin the redondilla in
that they allow scenes to flow rapidly with a regular rhyme and
rhythm, quintillas are also occasionally used within other forms, as in
this case in the second act of the play of a single quintilla inserted in the
midst of a passage of octavillas de pie quebrado:
[octavillas de pie quebrado]
CIEGO ¿Es vistoso, ciego honrado?
PEDRO Estoy desde que nací
en una tumba encerrado.
CIEGO Pues yo en algún tiempo vi;
pero ya, por mi pecado,
nada veo,
sino lo que no deseo,
que es lo que vee un desdichado.
¿Sabrá oraciones abondo?  [quintillas]
PEDRO Porque sé que sé infinitas,
aquesto, amigo, os respondo,
que a todos las doy escritas,
o a muy pocos las escondo.
Sé la del Ánima sola,  [octavillas de pie quebrado]
y sé la de San Pancracio,
que nadie cual ésta viola;
la de San Quirce y Acacio,
y la de Olalla española,
y otras mil,
adonde el verso sotil
y el bien decir se acrisola;
[BLIND MAN You’ve a whole sight of tricks maybe,
honoured Blind Man?
PEDRO I’ve been entombed
since birth in dark obscurity.
BLIND MAN Once I had sight but I was doomed
to lose it, God has punished me.
Now I can’t see a thing,
unless it’s something displeasing
which is what the accurséd see.
You know a lot of prayers, do you?
PEDRO So many prayers I can recall,
this is no boast, I swear it’s true:
I give out copies to one and all,
and those I hide them from are few;
I know one for the spirit and there’s
St Pancras’s prayer, efficacious
in warding off rape; I know prayers
of Saints Quirce and Acacious,
and Spanish Eulalia, where
the verse is sublime,
and the expression so divine,
they’ve refinement beyond compare].20
In terms of language, the intervening quintilla here allows for a break in
the sound, a key change as it were, which allows the Blind Man to
change his tone when asking Pedro if he knows any good prayers that
might be efficacious in their situation of what he believes is shared
blindness. When he changes the subject of his conversation from how
he was sighted at one time but is now blind, to the matter of doing
something about it, ‘¿Sabrá oraciones abondo?’, Pedro seizes the
opportunity to tee up his list of prayers and uses a simple quintilla to
give him time to invent the list. The quintilla is a placeholder, a
rhetorical pause, while the trickster puts the names together to best
impress the blind man he intends to dupe.
The romance is a traditional ballad form that goes back to medieval
times, and is widely used in popular works, often those that tell a
narrative planted firmly in the national imagination. Cervantes’s
intriguing play, La gran sultana, like many plays of the age, includes a
passage in this assonant form near the beginning. The play begins with
a descriptive dialogue, in forty-nine lines of Italianate tercetos, between
Roberto and a Turk, Salec, towards the end of which the Grand Turk
and his entourage pass by. The pair comment on his splendour in two
quintillas, but in a third, they agree that Roberto will continue a
narrative that he began the previous day. He then does so in eighty-
eight lines of romance (with an e-o assonance), after which they discuss
the situation in the same free-flowing metre until they exit forty-eight
lines later. The change from quintillas to romance reinforces the moment
of transition from dialogue to narrative.
A striking example of the use of romance for narrative comes with
Pedro de Urdemalas’s autobiographical monologue that he delivers as a
kind of set-piece to impress the gypsy chief. He includes many of his
exploits and adventures, including that a gypsy fortune teller once
predicted that he would join them:
[romance]
PEDRO Y, aunque yo no le doy crédito,
todavía veo en mí
un no sé qué que me inclina
a ser todo lo que oí;
pues, como deste pronóstico
el indicio veo en ti,
digo que he de ser gitano,
y que lo soy desde aquí.
[PEDRO And although I don’t believe him,
still I sense deep down inside,
an inclination to become
all that I heard prophesied.
His prediction may be fiction
but it’s manifest in you,
I declare, from this time forth,
I’m going to be a gypsy too.]21
Readers will note that the translator, Osment, made a choice with this
speech not to strictly follow the assonance of the original, but to rhyme
internally and on alternate lines, and he explains: ‘I decided to give this
more the quality of a rap with internal rhyming to draw attention to
Pedro’s interest in playing with words and meaning. In speaking these
lines John Ramm, who played Pedro in the Royal Shakespeare
Company production, found ways of using the internal rhymes to
illustrate Pedro’s ironic view of life, his wit and his intelligence.’22
Forms imported from Italy: the octava real,
tercetos, versos sueltos, and pareados
An elegant form that appears in the comedia is the octava real. This
form has a tradition of use for bucolic poetry, such as that of Boscán. It
is used by Cervantes in his ‘Canto de Calíope’, and he praises its formal
qualities in his Viaje del Parnaso. The full-length play La casa de los celos
begins with 200 lines of octavas reales, which are eleven-syllable lines
in stanzas of eight lines, rhyming ABABABCC. This form is associated
with national ‘epic poetry (such as Ercilla’s La Araucana) and was
popular with the quasi-tragic playwrights of the 1580s, such as Cueva,
Virués, and Cervantes, who used it heavily in El cerco de Numancia’.23 A
contemporary, cultured listener would think of lines written in this
form by Garcilaso, one of the most accomplished poets of the Golden
Age, and expect a heightened situation or aristocratic speaker.24 The
lengthened lines allow for a sense of heightened language and provide
room for elaborate phrases and rhetorical flourishes.
Octavas reales can be used to emphasize the gravity of a situation, or
the stateliness of the speaker. In the first act of Cervantes’s play El cerco
de Numancia, the character of personified Spain, crowned with towers
and carrying a castle, laments her suffering under the Romans, who are
increasingly oppressive:
[octavas reales]
ESPAÑA ¡Alto, sereno y espacioso cielo,
que con tus influencias enriqueces
la parte que es mayor deste mi suelo,
y sobre muchos otros le engrandeces,
muévate a compasión mi amargo duelo;
y, pues al afligido favoreces,
favoréceme a mí en ansia tamaña,
que soy la sola desdichada España!25
[SPAIN Lofty, serene, and spacious Heaven above!
Who with your starry influence and love
enrich the greater part of this, my earth,
and over all the rest exalt its worth.
Be moved to pity by my bitter grief,
you, who to the afflicted bring belief,
O favour me in this, my so-great pain,
who am the lonely and unlucky Spain!]26
The effect of the verse form is to allow for a vast and sweeping scope to
the appeal from Spain to Heaven, and it furthers Spain’s objective to
move her all-powerful listener to compassionate action. But they also
can be used for contrapuntal effect. The form can also give the speaker
an air that may surpass dignity and edge into arrogance and self-
aggrandizement.27 Conversely, if they are used by a peasant, it may
show noble qualities not typically associated with the low-born. This is
the case in Cervantes’s Pedro de Urdemalas with the sighing-shepherd
Clemente, who initiates a change from redondillas to octavas reales as he
attempts to win back the object of his affections, the shepherdess
Clemencia; these are the last four lines of the first octave:
[octavas reales]
CLEMENTE si siempre sobre el cerco de la luna
no has sido por mi lengua levantada,
cuando quiera decirte mi querella,
mudo silencio el cielo infunda en ella;
[CLEMENTE if my tongue has ever failed to raise you
way beyond the circle of the moon,
may I be silenced by the heavens above,
when next I come to make complaints of love.]28
Three-line stanzas of eleven syllables, each in a variety of rhyming
patterns, are known as tercetos. Los baños de Argel opens with twenty-
two lines in tercetos encadenados, eleven-syllable lines arranged in
three-line ‘linked’ stanzas that relate to one another. They do this by
linking the rhymes, i.e. ABA, BCB, CDC, for any number of repetitions,
and often ending with two couplets, YZYZ.29 This pattern is used in the
first few stanzas of Los baños de Argel, which opens with an exchange
between the Captain of Algiers, Cauralí, and a renegade, Yzuf. The
three-line stanzas allow for quick exchanges and set the scene clearly.
The tone is not as formal as the heavily patterned octavas reales, yet the
hendecasyllabic line heightens the language, which raises the stakes in
a tense, active scene that opens in medias res.
Endecasílabos sueltos and pareados
Unrhymed hendecasyllables in the Italianate style are not rare in the
comedia, since this is a useful and versatile form that offers a higher
register without the bounded regularity of rhyme. Navarro Tomás
mentions three instances of their use by Cervantes in La entretenida,
Pedro de Urdemalas, and the entremés El rufián viudo.30 Another instance
is in El rufián dichoso, which opens with seventy-two of these lines, only
the last pair of which rhyme.31 Cervantes often employs low-born
characters drawn from la hampa [an underworld], and here their
language reflects their status as ‘ruffians’. The lengthened lines allow
the speakers room to give their exposition and draw both their onstage
and auditorium hearers into the story ‘poco a poco’ [little by little], all
the while getting accustomed to the slang of their world, as they vie for
position and describe celebrated ruffians whom they admire.
Endecasílabos sueltos are found regularly in works of the period,
indeed they are the form in which Lope de Vega wrote his Arte nuevo.
Given without rhyme except for the occasional couplets, they offer an
opportunity for vacillation between high ideals, poetic expression
within the metre, and basic human interaction in dialogue. A charming
passage in sueltos in the first act of Pedro de Urdemalas that incorporates
typically Cervantine comic wordplay, and which will remind the reader
of Sancho Panza’s stint as a mayor in Don Quixote, includes this country
mayor Crespo’s verbal flubs:
[versos sueltos]
HORNACHUELOS ¿Es aquesto verdad, buen Lagartija?
LAGARTIJA Verdad; pero yo hallo por mi cuenta,
o que yo soy un asno, o que Hornachuelos
me queda a deber cuatro.
ALCALDE ¡Bravo caso!
LAGARTIJA No hay más en nuestro pleito, y me rezumo
en lo que sentenciare el señor Crespo.
REDONDO Rezumo por resumo, allá va todo.
ALCALDE ¿Qué decís vos a esto, Hornachuelos?
HORNACHUELOS No hay qué decir; yo en todo me arremeto
al señor Martín Crespo.
REDONDO Me remito,
¡pese a mi abuelo!
ALCALDE Dejadle que arremeta;
¿qué se os da a vos, Redondo?
REDONDO A mí, nonada.
[CRESPO Good Lagartija now, is this the truth?
LAGARTIJA True. However on my account I find,
that either I’m an ass or Hornachuelos
does owe me four.
CRESPO A fascinating case!
LAGARTIJA That’s the sum of our dispute and I’ll concuss
with any sentence that the mayor shall give.
REDONDO Concuss and not concur, it makes no odds.
CRESPO What have you to say now, Hornachuelos?
HORNACHUELOS There’s nothing more to say, I’ll convalesce
with Señor Crespo.
REDONDO Oh my giddy aunt!
It’s acquiesce!
CRESPO Let him convalesce,
what’s it to you, Redondo?
REDONDO To me? Nothing!]32
There is a comic contrast here between the lengthened, Italianate form,
and the mock-learned language that peppers the conversation. The
malapropisms of Crespo and his rustic complainants and their inability
to try the case with any degree of decorum are even more ridiculous
because the exchange takes place within a spate of formal verse.
Special forms: the lira and the sonnet
Cervantes’s play El laberinto de amor offers the reader a number of
passages in the lira form, which ‘is most commonly a six-line mixture of
seven- and eleven-syllable lines, of which the sixth must be
hendecasyllabic and must rhyme with the fifth. (The form that
Garcilaso had introduced to Spanish was in fact a five-line one).’33 The
rhyme scheme is often abbacC, but for all of the passages in this form in
El laberinto de amor, they are aBaBcC. The lira is, as its name implies, a
lyrical form, which is often ‘accompanied by the diction and imagery
typical of Petrarchan-style love poetry’.34 Yet on the surface it is a more
or less pedestrian dialogue about a bird and the destination of some
travellers. In that passage, there are twelve eleven-syllable lines and
twelve seven-syllable lines. The form of the lira allows for an intriguing
contrast between form and content, and an invitation for the reader to
pay close attention to the identities of the speakers.
In Pedro de Urdemalas, the shepherd, Clemente, uses liras in sextets
to describe his love for Clemencia, who appears veiled in order to
conceal her identity from her disapproving father:
[sextetos alirados]
CLEMENTE Sus rayos se imprimieron
en lo mejor del alma, de tal modo,
que en sí la convirtieron:
todo soy fuego, yo soy fuego todo,
y, con todo, me yelo,
si el sol me falta que me eclipsa un velo.
[CLEMENTE Her rays impressed themselves
upon the best part of my heart that they
transformed my heart to rays:
I’m all afire and fire is all I am
and yet withal I freeze
since by my sun’s eclipse a veil is all I see.]35
The language, with its contradictions typical of conceptismo and the
love poetry of Petrarch, is suited to its form, the lira.36 As the lines roll
back and forth between seven and eleven syllables, so can the dialogue
offer dips and crests of meaning and embellishment.
Sonnets, imported into Spain from the Italian tradition, are a formal
mode of expression and in drama indicate a moment of heightened
thought, often of rumination on a single idea or image. Because they
are solo pieces that normally represent the thought process of one
character, they function often like an aria in an opera, allowing a pause
in the dramatic action.37 In most cases the sonnets are Petrarchan, with
hendecasyllabic lines rhyming ABBA, ABBA, CDC, DCD, or alternatively
with the final two tercets rhyming CDE, CDE. There are other
variations on the rhyming of the tercets. Cervantes preferred the
version that rhymes ABBA, ABBA, CDE, CDE, the style used by
Garcilaso, Herrera, and Góngora, whereas Lope de Vega often rhymed
the final tercets CDC, DCD, as did Quevedo and Calderón de la Barca.38
The prose works of Cervantes contain many sonnets, such as those in
Don Quixote, La Galatea, and La ilustre fregona. Cervantes is innovative
with his use of sonnets, such as in two instances mentioned by Navarro
Tomás: the sonnet divided up into a dialogue between Babieca and
Rocinante in Don Quixote and the sonnet interrupted by other lines of
dialogue in La entretenida.39 La entretenida contains five sonnets, two of
which have a special feature called estrambote, or three extra lines at
the end:40
[soneto con estrambote]
DON AMBROSIO Por ti, virgen hermosa, esparce ufano, contra
 el rigor con que amenaza el cielo,
entre los surcos del labrado suelo,
el pobre labrador el rico grano.
 Por ti surca las aguas del mar cano
el mercader en débil leño a vuelo;
y, en el rigor del sol como del yelo,
pisa alegre el soldado el risco y llano.
 Por ti infinitas veces, ya perdida
la fuerza del que busca y del que ruega,
se cobra y se promete la vitoria.
 Por ti, báculo fuerte de la vida,
tal vez se aspira a lo imposible, y llega
el deseo a las puertas de la gloria.
 ¡Oh esperanza notoria,
amiga de alentar los desmayados,
aunque estén en miserias sepultados!41
[DON AMBROSIO For you, beautiful virgin, the poor peasant,
in spite of the sky’s menacing severity,
happily scatters the rich grain
between the furrows of the soil he has worked.
For you the merchant ploughs the waters
of the ancient sea in a fragile sailing ship,
and in the harshness of the sun and snow
the soldier contentedly treads peaks and prairies.
For you so many times,
when he who seeks and pleads has lost his strength,
victory has been promised and demanded.
For you, the sturdy staff of life,
perhaps one aspires to the impossible,
and desire arrives at the gates of glory.
Oh famous Hope, you raise our flagging spirits,
although they may be entombed in misery.]42
The estrambote adds the apostrophe to esperanza, to hope, which
elevates and clarifies the entire sonnet. This poetic feature was admired
in the Golden Age, and Cervantes himself says of the estrambote, that
those that are ‘cantados encantan, y escritos suspenden’ [‘sung are
enchanting, and written are breathtaking’].43
Verse in the entremeses
Cervantes, ever the innovator, wrote short, comic plays in a variety of
styles. He admired Lope de Rueda’s pasos, short dramatic pieces which
form part of larger plays often published alongside them. Writers of
entremeses, separate ‘interludes’ performed in between the acts of full-
length comedias and that in this period are sometimes unrelated or only
tangentially related to the main action, include Juan del Encina, Lope
de Rueda, Francisco de Quevedo, and Luis Quiñones de Benavente.44
Cervantes’s entremeses are written mostly in prose, which was the mode
of the early writers of short pieces, with only two of the eight written
in verse: El rufián viudo and La elección de los alcaldes de Daganzo. Verse
later became the standard form as the comedia took shape and was
performed with interludes, farces, and dances in between the acts of
the play.
Entremeses in prose with occasional verse
Cervantes’s use of occasional verse in the plays written mostly in prose
includes songs at the end. El juez de los divorcios is in prose, apart from
a song at the end in twenty octosyllabic lines of canción medieval.45 His
comic play La guarda cuidadosa is a mix of prose and verse, with a few
little songs and rhymes thrown in. Cervantes’s language is witty and
particularly full of innuendo in this play, such as his passage of prose
which delights in a fray of words between a soldier and a sexton.46 El
vizcaíno fingido is mostly in prose, apart from a song in assonant form
with a repeating estribillo, or little chorus, in this case one line ‘o sabe
poco, o no nada’.47 El retablo de las maravillas, Cervantes’s race-relations
version of the story of ‘The Emperor’s New Clothes’, is in prose. La
cueva de Salamanca is also mostly in prose, apart from eight lines of arte
mayor rhyming ABBAACCA, and thirty-six lines of romance consonante,
a form that is relatively rare. In this case it is the job of the Sacristán to
find words to rhyme with the Barbero’s chiming in with the word
‘Salamanca’ at the end of each stanza.
El viejo celoso is also in prose, but contains twenty-six lines of
villancico, which is a form usually used for songs, normally appearing in
six or eight syllables per line, and is structured into the chorus
(estribillo), the estrofa or pie, which itself divides into two sections: first
four verses that separate into two mudanzas, and a vuelta. The villancico
in El viejo celoso is the song ‘El agua de por San Juan’ in consonantal
rhyme:48
CAÑIZARES Señores, no quiero música: yo la doy por recebida.
MÚSICOS Pues aunque no la quiera.
[villancico]
MÚSICOS El agua de por San Juan
quita vino, y no da pan.
Las riñas de por San Juan
todo el año paz nos dan.
 Llover el trigo en las eras,
las viñas estando en cierne,
no hay labrador que gobierne
bien sus cubas y paneras;
 mas las riñas más de veras,
si suceden por San Juan
todo el año paz nos dan.
[CAÑIZARES Gentlemen, I don’t want any music. I shall
consider your duties
 already discharged.
MUSICIANS Well, even though you don’t want it…They sing.
The rain that falls on Midsummer’s Day
Weakens the wine and spoils the hay.
Quarrels in June at the Feast of St John
The rest of the year are forgotten and gone.
When wheat is golden, full and fine,
The grapes are scanty on the vine,
The farmer’s barns may overflow
While yet his casks in wine are low.
A quarrel that seems bound to grow,
If it falls in June at the Feast of St John
The rest of the year is forgotten and gone.]49
Entremeses written in verse
El rufián viudo is mostly in eleven-syllable unrhymed lines (sueltos) and
concludes in romance, which assonates with repeating ‘a’ sounds on
alternate lines. In this passage in sueltos, Trampagos, the ‘widowed
pimp’, praises the faithfulness of his best prostitute, Pericona, who has
recently died:
[versos sueltos]
TRAMPAGOS Quince cuaresmas, si en la cuenta acierto,
pasaron por la pobre desde el día
que fue mi cara, agradecida prenda,
en las cuales, sin duda, susurraron
a sus oídos treinta y más sermones,
y en todos ellos, por respeto mío,
estuvo firme, cual está a las olas
del mar movible la inmovible roca.
[TRAMPAGOS Fifteen times the Lenten season came,
deafening her with countless pious sermons,
throughout them all she kept her faith in me,
unflinching, like the steadfast rock that stands
against the pounding of the restless sea.]50
The parody of the bucolic eclogues of Garcilaso de la Vega is clear here,
as in those writings ‘shepherds become enamoured of nymphs and
lament the sad death of one of them. Cervantes’s Interlude turns this
Vergilian image upside-down, substituting prostitutes and pimps for
nymphs and shepherds’.51 Smith notes that Cervantes ‘also uses the
same metrical measure as Garcilaso, while replacing the traditional
pastoral imagery with ribald and irreverent allusions’.52 Cervantes is
fond of those; here he refers to the clerical practice of delivering
sermons directly to prostitutes on Good Friday, imploring them to
repent, and Trampagos describes, teary-eyed, how she withstood those
and remained faithful to her pimp.
The second verse interlude is La elección de los alcaldes de Daganzo,
mixing forms with syllable lengths ranging from six to twelve per line.
Included among those forms are the seguidilla (which varies in length)
and the romancillo, which resembles a romance but is in six-syllable
lines instead of eight. The final example here is in characteristically
Cervantine meta-dramatic style, as the verses are then commented
upon by the onstage hearers:
MÚSICOS ¡Vivan de Daganzo los regidores,
que parecen palmas, puesto que son robles!
Bailan.
JARRETE ¡Brava trova, por Dios!
HUMILLOS         Y muy sentida.
BERROCAL Éstas se han de imprimir, para que quede
memoria de nosotros en los siglos
de los siglos. Amén.
BACHILLER Callen, si pueden.
[MUSICIANS Councillors, may you live many days,
solid as oak and worthy of praise.
(They dance.)
KNUCKLEKNEES What excellent verses!
PUFF So deeply felt!
CLOD They should be published as a fitting monument
to us for all the ages yet to come.
BACHELOR HOOF I wish they’d stop their chatter and be
quiet!]53
Conclusion
In the preface to his Ocho comedias y ocho entremeses nuevos, nunca
representados, Cervantes wrote of his intention to publish his plays and
that he was resigned to the fact that this might be in place of their
performance:
[M]e dijo un librero que él me las comprara si un autor de título no le
hubiera dicho que de mi prosa se podía esperar mucho, pero que del
verso, nada; y, si va a decir la verdad, cierto que me dio pesadumbre el
oírlo.
[[A] bookseller said that he would have bought them if a licensed actor-
manager had not told him that, although much could be expected of my
prose, my poetry was worthless. I must confess that this caused me
much grief.]54
The notion that Cervantes’s plays were consigned to the page because
no one wanted to perform them is disappointing to his readers who
imagine them playing out with distinctiveness on the stage, offering
playgoers an alternative to Lope’s mode of playwriting, dominating the
playhouses of the time. Cervantes wrote in polymetric verse, as did his
contemporaries, yet his versification and language are bounded only by
his own style. His dramatic works’ innate performativity and
theatricality is heightened by the metrics, rhyme, and form of the
language. In this study, an analysis of the verse in Pedro de Urdemalas
and examples from his other plays has given rise to the following
contention: with each line Cervantes winks at his readers and invites
them to play in his gymnasium of language, toying with the boundaries
of form. As form interacts with style, so his verses speak to readers and
audiences of a writer whose colourful personal history plays out in
every twist of plot and turn of phrase.
Works Cited
Antonucci, Fausta, editor. Métrica y estructura dramática en el teatro de Lope de
Vega (Kassel: Reichenberger, 2007).
Arata, Stefano. ‘La conquista de Jerusalén, Cervantes, y la generación teatral de
1580’. Criticón 54 (1992): 9–112.
Asensio, Eugenio. ‘Entremeses’. In Suma cervantina, edited by J. B. Avalle-Arce
and E. C. Riley (London: Tamesis, 1973), pp. 171–97.
Baehr, Rudolf. Manual de versificación española, translated by K. Wagner and F.
López Estrada (Madrid: Gredos, 1970).
Blecua, José Manuel. ‘La poesía lírica de Cervantes’. In Sobre poesía de la edad de
oro, edited by Blecua (Madrid: Gredos, 1970), pp. 161–95.
Buceta, Erasmo. ‘Apuntaciones sobre el soneto con estrambote en la literatura
española’. Revue Hispanique LXXII (1928): pp. 460–74.
Castro, Adolfo de, editor. Poetas líricos de los siglos XVI y XVII (Madrid: Atlas,
1951).
Castro, Adolfo de. The Diversion, translated by John O’Neill. http://
entretenida.outofthewings.org/text/diversion/princeps/I-3.html.
Cervantes, Miguel de. Eight Interludes, translated by Dawn L. Smith (London: J.
M. Dent, 1996).
Cervantes, Miguel de. El rufián dichoso. In Cervantes completo, vol. 14, edited by
Florencio Sevilla Arroyo and Antonio Rey Hazas (Madrid: Alianza, 1998).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Entremeses. In Cervantes completo, vol. 17, edited by
Florencio Sevilla Arroyo and Antonio Rey Hazas (Madrid: Alianza, 1998).
Cervantes, Miguel de. La entretenida; Pedro de Urdemalas. In Cervantes completo,
vol. 16, edited by Florencio Sevilla Arroyo and Antonio Rey Hazas (Madrid:
Alianza, 1998).
Cervantes, Miguel de. La Numancia. In Cervantes completo, vol. 3, edited by
Florencio Sevilla Arroyo and Antonio Rey Hazas (Madrid: Alianza, 1996).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Pedro the Great Pretender, translated by Philip Osment
(London: Oberon, 2004).
Cervantes, Miguel de. The Siege of Numantia, translated Roy Campbell. In The
Classic Theatre, edited by Eric Bentley (New York: Doubleday, 1959), pp. 97–
160.
Díez Echarri, Emiliano. Teorías métricas del Siglo de Oro (Madrid: Gráficas
menor, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, 1949).
Dixon, Victor. El perro del hortelano: A Critical Edition by Lope de Vega (London:
Tamesis, 1981).
Dixon, Victor. ‘The Study of Versification as an Aid to Interpreting the
Comedia’. In The Golden Age Comedia: Text, Theory and Performance, edited by
Charles Ganelin and Howard Mancing (West Lafayette: Purdue University
Press, 1994), pp. 384–402.
Dixon, Victor. ‘The Uses of Polymetry: An Approach to Editing the Comedia as
Verse Drama’. Michigan Romance Studies 5. Editing the Comedia (1985): pp.
104–25.
Domínguez Caparrós, José. Métrica de Cervantes (Alcalá de Henares: Centro de
Estudios Cervantinos, 2002).
Fuente Fernández, Francisco Javier. ‘Reivindicando a Cervantes poeta’. https://
literaturayotrosmundos.wordpress.com/2013/07/25/reivindicando-a-
cervantes-poeta-ii-el-soneto-con-estrambote-mas-famoso/. Accessed 8 January
2016.
Güell, Monica. ‘Usos dramáticos y estéticos de la versificación en El perro del
Hortelano’. In Métrica y estructura dramática en el teatro de Lope de Vega, edited
by Fausta Antonucci (Kassel: Reichenberger, 2007), pp. 109–32.
Jeffs, Kathleen. ‘Mellifluent Influence: Octaves reales in Translation in the Royal
Shakespeare Company’s Golden Age Season’. In Connecting Past and Present:
Exploring the Influence of the Spanish Golden Age in the Twentieth and Twenty-
First Centuries, edited by Aaron M. Kahn (Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge
Scholars Publishing, 2015), pp. 133–57.
Navarro Tomás, Tomás. Métrica española: Reseña histórica y descriptiva (New
York: Las Américas, 1966).
Osment, Philip. ‘The Rhyme and the Reason: On Translating Pedro de
Urdemalas’. In The Spanish Golden Age in English: Perspectives on Performance,
edited by Catherine Boyle and David Johnston, with Janet Morris (London:
Oberon, 2007), pp. 89–99.
Rojas, Ricardo. Cervantes (Buenos Aires: La facultad, 1935).
Schevill, Rodolfo. Obras completas de Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra, Comedias y
Entremeses, vol. 6, ‘Introducción’ (Madrid: Gráficas reunidas, 1922).
Electronic text by Fred F. Jehle (Fred F. Jehle and Purdue Research
Foundation, 
1999) 
http://users.ipfw.edu/jehle/CERVANTE/CEFJ6.HTM.
Accessed 19 August 2016.
Smith, Dawn. ‘Transformation and Fluidity in the Translation of Classical Texts
for Performance: The Case of Cervantes’s Entremeses’. In The Comedia in
English: Translation and Performance, edited by Susan Paun de García and
Donald R. Larson (Woodbridge, Tamesis: 2008), pp. 95–107.
Smith, Dawn L. Introduction to Eight Interludes by Miguel de Cervantes,
translated by Smith (London: J. M. Dent, 1996).
Thacker, Jonathan. A Companion to Golden Age Theatre (Woodbridge: Tamesis,
2007).
Vega, Lope de. Arte nuevo de hacer comedias, edited by Enrique García Santo-
Tomás (Madrid: Cátedra, 2006).
Vitse, Marc. ‘Polimetría y estructuras dramáticas en la comedia de corral del
siglo XVII: nueva reflexión sobre las formas englobadas (el caso de
Peribáñez)’. In Métrica y estructura dramática en el teatro de Lope de Vega,
edited by Fausta Antonucci (Kassel: Reichenberger, 2007), pp. 169–205.
1 Domínguez Caparrós, p. 16. See Schevill, pp. 17–18. Highlights of
Cervantine verse are excerpted by Castro.
2 This study has benefited from the advice of Jonathan Thacker and Victor
Dixon, to whom I express my thanks.
3 Domínguez Caparrós, p. 11.
4 These forms are studied by Domínguez Caparrós.
5 Thacker, p. 180.
6 Vega, p. 148.
7 All translations were completed by the author of this chapter unless
otherwise noted.
8 Dixon, ‘The Uses of Polymetry’, pp. 120–1; original emphasis. See also his
‘The Study of Versification…’, pp. 384–402.
9 All three studies appear in Antonucci.
10 Thacker, p. 180.
11 Thacker, p. 179.
12 Dixon, El perro…, p. 55.
13 This play serves as an example of Cervantes’s reaction to Lopean
dramaturgy, as he undercuts Lope’s dominant playwriting styles in several
ways. ‘Cervantes pointedly ignores Lope’s advice in the contemporaneous Arte
nuevo suggesting the setting up of “el caso” in Act 1, its complication until the
middle of Act 3 and then abrupt resolution…Instead he builds his play around
episodes from the ingenious Pedro’s life’ (Thacker, p. 59). Additionally, Lope
would have organized his plot around a leading lady (dama) and gentleman
(galán), taking three acts to resolve obstacles to the match, whereas Cervantes
concludes Act One with a peasant wedding, vaguely associates the gypsy girl
Belica as a love match for Pedro that never comes to fruition, and shows the
King to be besotted with his niece, all of which belie Lope’s complex but
ultimately neatly tied-up plots and love stories. ‘Love, it emerges, is just one
aspect of life, which may be found and may be missed. In the comedia nueva it
has become the raison d’être’ (Thacker, p. 59).
14 All subsequent references to and quotations from Pedro de Urdemalas will
be by act and line number as given in the edition by Florencio Sevilla Arroyo
and Antonio Rey Hazas (Madrid: Alianza, 1998).
15 Cervantes, Pedro de Urdemalas, III.3040–3.
16 Cervantes, Pedro the Great Pretender, p. 114. In this translation, Osment
uses polymetric forms that nearly match the Spanish rhyme schemes, so the
reader can get a sense of what those forms sound like in English. For an account
of his translation methods, see also Osment, pp. 89–99.
17 Domínguez Caparrós, p. 86; Thacker, p. 182.
18 Navarro Tomás, p. 249; Domínguez Caparrós, pp. 22, 86, and 89.
19 Cervantes, Pedro de Urdemalas, I.1–5; p. 15.
20 Cervantes, Pedro de Urdemalas, II.1342–62; p. 59.
21 Cervantes, Pedro de Urdemalas, I.760–77; p. 38.
22 Osment, p. 94.
23 Thacker, p. 184.
24 Dixon, El perro…, pp. 55–6.
25 Cervantes, La Numancia, I.353–60, p. 26.
26 Cervantes, The Siege of Numantia, p. 13; note that the translator replaces
the rhyme scheme of the octavas reales, ABABABCC, with rhyming couplets,
AABBCCDD.
27 Güell, p. 116.
28 Cervantes, Pedro de Urdemalas, I.155–8; pp. 19–20. See also Jeffs, p. 145.
29 Domínguez Caparrós, p. 22.
30 Navarrio Tomás, p. 241.
31 Cervantes, El rufián dichoso, I. 71–2, p. 156.
32 Cervantes, Pedro de Urdemalas, I.306–17; p. 25.
33 Thacker, p. 184.
34 Thacker, p. 185.
35 Cervantes, Pedro de Urdemalas, I. 382–7; p. 27. Note that here Osment uses
the line lengths of the lira but not the rhyme scheme.
36 See Cervantes, La entretenida…, p. 153, n. 42.
37 See Dixon, Introduction to El perro del hortelano, p. 56.
38 Navarro Tomás, pp. 233–4.
39 Navarro Tomás, p. 234.
40 See Buceta.
41 Cervantes, La entretenida…, II. 1269–85; pp. 69–70.
42 Cervantes, The Diversion. O’Neill’s translation does not follow the verse
pattern of the sonnet.
43 Don Quixote, II.38; quoted in Fuente Fernández.
44 A panoramic view of the development of the entremés is given by Thacker,
pp. 156–62. See also Asensio.
45 The form of canción medieval normally rhymes ‘abbacddcabba’ (Domínguez
Caparrós, p. 130). However, the passage is ‘abbacddcabbaeffeabba’ with the
underlined lines functioning as an estribillo at the end (p. 40).
46 Two different translations of that passage are analyzed by Smith,
‘Transformation and Fluidity…’.
47 Cervantes, Entremeses, pp. 129–30, original emphasis.
48 Domínguez Caparrós, p. 120.
49 Cervantes, Entremeses, pp. 188–9, original emphasis; Eight Interludes, p.
143. Note the translation does not follow the verse pattern of the villancico but
does display some of its other poetic features.
50 Cervantes, Entremeses, p. 43; Eight Interludes, p. 31. The translation is given
more or less in pentameters.
51 Smith, Introduction, p. 23.
52 Smith, Introduction, p. 23.
53 Cervantes, Entremeses, p. 79; original emphasis; Eight Interludes, p. 51.
54 Cervantes, Entremeses, pp. 14–15; Eight Interludes, p. 5.
Section 5
Cervantes’s Poetry and
other Writings
Chapter 20
Cervantine Poetry
History and Context
Adrienne L. Martín
University of California, Davis
In Chapter Four of his Viaje del Parnaso Cervantes proclaims that ‘Desde
mis tiernos años amé el arte/dulce de la agradable poesía’ [‘From my
earliest years I loved/the sweet art of pleasant poetry’].1 And as this
mock epic in tercets confirms, Cervantes wrote poetry until the end of
his days. Moreover, throughout his prose works he refers consistently
to the function, the value, and the qualities that this ‘sweet art’ should
possess. From La Galatea to Don Quixote, in the exemplary novels La
gitanilla, El licenciado Vidriera, La ilustre fregona, and El coloquio de los
perros, and in his posthumous Byzantine romance Los trabajos de Persiles
y Sigismunda he returns somewhat obsessively to the topic. His poetic
elucubrations culminate with the text from Viaje del Parnaso that
accompanies the fictitious letter from Apolo Délfico to Cervantes, dated
22 July 1614. Those comic ‘Privilegios, ordenanzas y advertencias que
Apolo envía a los poetas españoles’ [‘Privileges, ordinances and
cautions that Apollo sends to Spanish poets’] compose Cervantes’s
ironic-burlesque farewell to the topic. Curiously enough, and in spite of
poetry’s significance to Cervantes, studies of his lyric verse continue to
lag behind those of his prose and dramatic works.
During Cervantes’s own time, the opinions of his contemporaries
about his poetry, which are outlined by Bonilla y San Martín, tend to
be conflicting and generally negative. In the nineteenth century several
critics misinterpreted an (in)famous tercet from the Viaje del Parnaso in
which Cervantes declares: ‘Yo, que siempre trabajo y me desvelo/por
parecer que tengo de poeta/la gracia que no quiso darme el cielo’ [‘I
who constantly labour and struggle/to attain the poetic grace/that
Heaven denied me’].2 Both Fernández de Navarrete and Fitzmaurice-
Kelly in their biographies (and even Bonilla y San Martín and Cernuda
later on) failed to recognize the ironic nature of these verses, took them
at face value, and quoted them as proof that Cervantes himself knew he
was no poet. Others, such as Adolfo de Castro, staunchly defended him
as a great poet.3
A selection of the critical corpus of studies on Cervantes’s poetry,
from the mid-nineteenth through the first decades of the twenty-first
centuries, includes the following in chronological order: Marcelino
Menéndez Pelayo, ‘Cervantes considerado como poeta’ (1873); Ricardo
Rojas, ‘De Cervantes considerado como poeta lírico’, the introduction to
his compilation Poesías de Cervantes (1916), and Cervantes (Cervantes,
poeta lírico. Cervantes, poeta dramático. Cervantes, poeta épico) (1948);
José Manuel Blecua, ‘Garcilaso y Cervantes’ (1947) and ‘La poesía lírica
de Cervantes’ (1947); Gerardo Diego, ‘Cervantes y la poesía’ (1948);
Luis Cernuda, ‘Cervantes, poeta’ (1964); Juan Luis Alborg, ‘La poesía de
Cervantes’ (1966); Ángel Valbuena Prat, ‘Cervantes, poeta’ (1968); Elias
L. Rivers, ‘«Viaje del Parnaso» y poesías sueltas’ (1973), ‘Cervantes y
Garcilaso’ (1981), and ‘Cervantes, poeta serio y burlesco’ (1995). The
purpose of many of these studies is to reassess and vindicate Cervantes
as a poet of talent. Several were written by poets of the Spanish
Generation of 1927, such as Luis Cernuda, Vicente Aleixandre, Manuel
Altolaguirre, Gerardo Diego, and Rafael Alberti, who were looking back
to their forefathers who wrote during the Golden Age of Spanish
poetry, not without a certain ‘anxiety of influence’ and a desire to
recuperate classical forms.4 It is not until several decades later that the
focus will shift from ‘Cervantes, poeta’ to more complex analyses of his
verse.
In the 1970s and 1980s, critics broaden their perspective to analyse
the verse and individual poems incorporated into Cervantes’s prose and
dramatic works. Among the following, several can be considered
landmark studies: María Banura Badui de Zogbi, ‘El valiente
Escarramán. De la jácara al entremés’ (1977); Francisco Márquez
Villanueva, ‘La buenaventura de Preciosa (1978–79); Vicente Gaos,
‘Cervantes, poeta’ (1979); Adriana Lewis Galanes, ‘Cervantes: el poeta
en su tiempo’ (1981) and ‘El soneto “Vuela mi estrecha y débil
esperanza”: texto, contextos y entramado intertexual’ (1990); Andrés
Amorós, ‘Los poemas del Quijote’ (1981); Mary Gaylord Randel, ‘La
poesía y los poetas en los entremeses de Cervantes’ (1982) and ‘The
Language of Limits and the Limits of Language: The Crisis of Poetry in
La Galatea’ (1982); José Miguel Caso González, ‘Cervantes, del
Manierismo al Barroco’ (1983); Daniel Eisenberg, ‘The Romance as Seen
by Cervantes’ (1984); José Luis Fernández de la Torre, ‘Cervantes,
poeta de festejos y certámenes’ (1984) and ‘Historia y poesía: algunos
ejemplos de la lírica “pública” en Cervantes’ (1987); Pedro Ruiz Pérez,
‘El manierismo en la poesía de Cervantes’ (1985) and ‘Contexto crítico
de la poesía cervantina’ (1997); Francisco Ynduráin, ‘La poesía de
Cervantes: aproximaciones’ (1985); Adrienne L. Martín, ‘El soneto
cervantino a la muerte de Herrera: texto y contexto’ (1985), ‘La
sonetada o los problemas de una escondida poesía bufonesca’ (1990)
and Cervantes and the Burlesque Sonnet (1991); Antonio Prieto,
‘Cervantes poeta’ (1987); Leopoldo de Luis, ‘Apuntes para dos sonetos
de Cervantes’ (1987–8); and Jenaro Talens, ‘Poetry as Autobiography:
Theory and Poetic Practice in Cervantes’ (1988).
Since roughly the 1990s, a substantial number of convincing articles
and, infrequently, books have been published in Spanish, English, and
other languages addressing Cervantes’s poetry. Furthermore, in the
twenty-first century we have entered a new age with renewed impetus
on the exegesis of his poetic practice, with essays by such established
Golden Age scholars as Ignacio Arellano, Francisco Javier Díez de
Revenga, Jaime Fernández, Gaspar Garrote Bernal, Mary Gaylord,
Carlos Mata Induráin, Antonio Rey Hazas, Aurora Egido, José Luis
Fernández de la Torre, Isaías Lerner, José Ignacio Díez Fernandez,
Mercedes Alcalá Galán, Isabel Colón, Rodrigo Olay Valdés, Álvaro
Alonso, Julia D’Onofrio, José Montero Reguera, and Pedro Ruiz Pérez.
A selection of these essays follow or are included in the bibliography.
Aurelio González, ‘Cervantes y los temas del Romancero nuevo’
(1993); L.E. Hens Pérez, ‘Aspectos a revisar en la poesía de Cervantes:
las poesías sueltas’ (1993); Monique Joly, ‘En torno a las antologías
poéticas de La gitanilla y La ilustre fregona’ (1993); Jean Canavaggio,
‘Garcilaso en Cervantes: “¡Oh dulces prendas por mi mal halladas!”’
(1994); Gaspar Garrote Bernal, ‘Intertextualidad poética y funciones de
la poesía en el Quijote’ (1996); J. Ignacio Díez Fernández, ‘El soneto del
rufián “arrepentido” (en dos series)’ (1997); Mercedes Alcalá Galán,
‘Teoría de la poesía en Cervantes: Poesía citada en la novela’ (1999);
José Lara Garrido, ‘Sonetos epicédicos en homenaje del “Divino”
Herrera. El rastro tenue de una fama póstuma’ (1999) and ‘Cervantes
en un soneto, o el prodigio de la mirada marginal’ (2006); Fernando
Romo Feito, ‘Cervantes ante la palabra lírica’ (2001), ‘Cervantes ante la
palabra lírica: El teatro’ (2007), and ‘Cervantes ante la palabra lírica: el
Quijote’ (2012); José Domínguez Caparrós, Métrica de Cervantes (2002);
Jaime Fernández, ‘La verdad del epitafio para la tumba de don Quijote’
(2005); Carlos Mata Induráin, ‘Los dos sonetos a la pérdida de la goleta
(Quijote, I, 40) en el contexto de la historia del capitán cautivo’ (2007);
Steven Wagschal, ‘Digging up the Past: The Archeology of Emotion in
Cervantes’ «Romance de los celos»’ (2007); and José Montero Reguera,
‘Los poemas carmelitanos de Miguel de Cervantes’ (2007), ‘Poesías para
un poeta’ (2008), ‘Heterodoxias poéticas cervantinas (Prolegómenos
para una edición crítica de la poesía de Miguel de Cervantes)’ (2011),
‘Trayectoria del epitafio en la poesía cervantina’ (2012), ‘La gitanilla:
una rei-vindicación de la poesía’ (2013), and ‘La poesía. Hacia una
nueva edición’ (2013); Rodrigo Olay Valdés, ‘Reconsideración de la
poesía cervantina: los defectos métricos y estilísticos de Cervantes’
(2013); and Julia D’Onofrio, ‘«fuese y no hubo nada». Cervantes frente
a la manipulación y la dilapidación simbólica’ (2014).
This listing, which is neither comprehensive nor complete, does
provide a representative overview of the variety of critical exegesis on
Cervantine poetry contained in other works or independent from them,
and brings evolving analytical tendencies to light. Viewed as a critical
corpus, the earliest of these essays (clustered from the mid- to late
twentieth century) tended to brevity and rendered valuable, yet partial,
results regarding Cervantes’s talents as a poet; as mentioned before,
they are often characterized by a particular focus and concomitant lack
of consensus on the quality of his verse. Since then the fruitless but
long-standing debate regarding whether or not Cervantes was a (good)
poet has largely been laid to rest. That said, as far back as 1873
Menéndez Pelayo had already vindicated him as a poet; apparently,
Fernández de Navarrete was the guilty party who first enshrined the
error of comparing Cervantes’s verse to his prose, instead of to the
poetry written by his contemporaries.5
Any attempt to compare Cervantes’s poetry favourably to the superb
and stylistically unique narrative found in Don Quixote and the Novelas
ejemplares is doomed to fail since his verse (as well as that of countless
other poets of his age) is bound to suffer from the comparison. Be that
as it may, however, we cannot fully assess Cervantes’s significance
within Golden Age literature without taking into account the poetry
included in Don Quixote, the Novelas ejemplares, La Galatea, Viaje del
Parnaso, his dramatic works written in verse, and, of course, his
uncollected verse, of which surely only a part has been conserved. As
Romo Feito reminded us at the turn of the new century, Cervantes’s
poetic vocation is undeniable; he wrote verse his entire life, and his
poetic output is superior in quantity to that of many whose reputation
as poets is indisputable.6 As a matter of fact, Cervantes’s poetic corpus
is more extensive than that of such consecrated early modern poets as
Jorge Manrique, Garcilaso de la Vega, San Juan de la Cruz, Fray Luis de
León, and many other poets of his generation and beyond. As Romo
Feito affirms, for the interpretive canon today, it is a given that
Cervantes is a poet, and a great one, although certainly different from
the majority of his contemporaries.7
In recent years, the most innovative work on Cervantine poetry is
emerging from a team of scholars at the University of Vigo, led by José
Montero Reguera. Montero Reguera and Romo Feito in particular have
published a series of path-breaking articles, a selection of which are
contained in the bibliography. Moreover, Montero Reguera’s research
group is in the process of preparing the first modern, truly critical
edition and study of Cervantes’s complete poetic works, of which a
preliminary version can be found in Montero Reguera’s chapter in Los
textos de Cervantes.8 Early editions of Cervantes’s poetry such as
Bonilla’s, Rodríguez Marín’s, and Rojas’s have been out of print for
decades, and Vicente Gaos’s two-volume edition is incomplete since it
does not include Cervantes’s dramatic verse. All previous editions fall
far short of what is needed and Montero’s becomes even more essential
to meet the demands of contemporary research on Cervantine poetry.
Moreover, Montero Reguera’s chapter includes a useful chronological
index of Cervantes’s poetic works, as well as an extensive bibliography
of editions and critical studies; this study is indispensable for all
readers and interpreters of Cervantes’s poetry. Most recently, Adrián J.
Sáez has published a well-annotated collection of Cervantes’s poetry
that includes the uncollected verse, Viaje del Parnaso, the ‘Canto de
Calíope’ from La Galatea, and attributed poems, but not the verse from
his novels and plays.
It is clear that today critical exegesis of Cervantes’s lyric poetry is
being taken into new directions and examined as an essential part of
his literary output. Many twenty-first century studies are excellent, and
those from the United States continue to apply new theoretical
approaches to illuminate Cervantes’s works. Steven Wagschal, for
example, utilizes cognitive theory to explore the workings of emotion
in the famous ballad on jealousy. Nonetheless, it is disappointing that
to date, only three full-length studies have been published on
Cervantine poetry: my Cervantes and the Burlesque Sonnet, José
Domínguez Caparros’s Métrica de Cervantes, and Emiliano Álvarez’s La
poesía, señor hidalgo…Funciones de la poesía en el Quijote.9 Thus, a
significant critical lacuna remains in Cervantes studies, one that needs
to be remedied with more monographic analyses. At the conclusion of
this essay I suggest several avenues of future research on Cervantes’s
poetry in the hope that new generations of scholars will take up the
challenge.
Cervantes, one must reiterate, excels in several poetic genres,
particularly the ballad, which deserves comprehensive attention.
Although a good number of articles have been written on individual
ballads, and on the influence of the romancero viejo on Don Quixote, no
all-encompassing study of Cervantes’s original ballads exists, even
though he wrote in Chapter Four of the Viaje del Parnaso: ‘Yo he
compuesto romances infinitos/y el de los celos es el que más estimo/
entre otros que los tengo por malditos’ [‘I have composed an infinite
number of ballads/and the one on jealously is the one I regard the
most/amongst others that I find damnable’].10 Because of this, the
ballad can be used as a case study for remedying the comparative lack
of global scholarship on Cervantine poetry, even at a time when much
is being made of the world literature links between him and
Shakespeare.11
We further intuit that Cervantes was prominent during his time as a
writer of satirical ballads because of the following anecdote related by
Bonilla y San Martín, Rivers, and other critics. A witness during Lope
de Vega’s 1588 trial for writing libellous ballads against Elena Osorio
and her family reported that don Luis de Vargas said the following
regarding a satirical ballad that was read aloud in the playhouse on
Madrid’s Calle del Príncipe: ‘Este romance es del estilo de cuatro o
cinco que solos lo podrán hacer: podrá ser de Liñán, y no está aquí, y
de Cervantes, y no está aquí; pues mío no es, puede ser de Vivar o de
Lope de Vega’ [‘This ballad is written in the style of the four or five
poets who could do it: it could be by Liñán, and he isn’t here; or by
Cervantes, and he isn’t here; since it’s not mine, it could be either by
Vivar or Lope de Vega’].12
We should keep in mind that, as Montero Reguera asserts, for his
contemporaries in 1588, when the romances nuevos or new ballads were
at the peak of their popularity, Cervantes was one of their leading
practitioners.13 Consequently, given his reputation as a master of
balladry, and setting aside the typical Cervantine irony that
characterizes the Parnaso, where are those ‘infinite ballads’ that he
claims to have written? Even if we assume he was exaggerating, by my
count he published at least fifty-three romances: eight in the Novelas
ejemplares; six in Don Quixote; twenty-nine in his plays; eight in his
interludes; and two uncollected ones. If to that sum we add the poems
he wrote in coplas redondillas—that were sometimes called romances en
redondillas and were often used in poetry written in underworld slang
(poesía germanesca)—plus the old ballads he mentions or otherwise
refashions in Don Quixote, the number is considerably larger than fifty-
three and far from insignificant.
Because the ballad is conventionally used to narrate, as Lope de
Vega stipulated in his 1609 Arte Nuevo de hacer comedias en este tiempo,
and Cervantes was a master storyteller, it is logical that he excelled in
this poetic genre that privileges anecdote over emotion. A few of the
better-known examples are the malicious and ingeniously erotic
‘buenaventura de Preciosa’ [‘Preciosa’s fortune-telling’] from La
gitanilla, Altisidora’s insulting poem to the knight in Don Quixote II.57,
and the songs in ballad form that appear in the interludes, especially
the ‘ballad of Escarramán’ from El rufián viudo llamado Trampagos.14
The interludes are brief, satirical and burlesque, and a perfect
location for ballads whose short verses advance the action at a rapid
pace. Moreover, six of the eight ballads in Cervantes’s interludes are
lively songs and dances that conclude the playlets.15 We should
remember that interludes customarily end in songs, dances, or brawls;
Cervantes’s are no exception, and he often includes songs in ballad
meter. Besides being perfectly in keeping with the comical nature of the
interludes, the romances add atmosphere, movement, rhythm, grace,
and in a certain way authenticity to his depiction of the lower classes.
Cervantes’s ballads also tend to be highly literary, or textual. As we
know, the interludes included in his 1615 collection of Ocho comedias, y
ocho entremeses nuevos, nunca representados were not staged during his
lifetime, and contrary to most drama, they were likely written to be
read. A good example of Cervantine lyricism and literariness is the
ballad sung by Quevedo’s mythic ruffian, the jaque Escarramán, who
bursts onto the scene during Trampagos and Repulida’s wedding at the
end of El rufián viudo: ‘Ya salió de las gurapas/el valiente Escarramán’
[‘Escarramán the brave/is out of the galleys’].16 These lines integrate
the underworld heroes who had already been immortalized in famous
comic romances on the experiences of jaques, called jácaras. Cervantes’s
song telescopes Escarramán’s adventures in the galleys and shipwreck
in the Mediterranean, his enslavement by Turks, and escape to Spain.
His tale has obvious resonances of Cervantes’s own life, although told
from a comic point of view.17
As is to be expected, Cervantes is also a master of burlesque rhyme.
An exceptional example is provided by the linguistic pirouettes he
performs to compose a comically dissonant consonant rhyme scheme in
‘-anca’ for the refrain ‘Salamanca’ in the ballad sung by the barber and
sexton in the interlude La cueva de Salamanca. Cervantes is practiced in
composing this type of humorous, inharmonious verse when he wants
to and the context requires it; one only has to read the poems that
frame Part I of Don Quixote for impeccable examples of this process.18
To create such purposefully dissonant verse is aesthetically challenging
and only a good poet can be as adept at it as Cervantes. Moreover,
Cervantes’s ballads reveal a master’s hand in controlling decorum and
expressivity in the creation of expert narrative verse.
Given the foregoing, a monograph on Cervantes’s romances is long
overdue, as is another on his serious sonnets, since Cervantes was also
an expert and prolific sonneteer. The same can be said of the tercets in
Viaje del Parnaso. Montero Reguera comes to many of the same
conclusions as I and calls for studies of Cervantes’s lexicon; use of
poetic tropes such as synecdoche, metonymy, and paronomasia; and
analyses of his symbolic language and versification. Until such
monographs are published and Cervantes’s poetic corpus is established,
our understanding of his verse remains partial and fragmentary.
I conclude by reiterating what every Cervantes scholar knows and
suggesting possibilities for future research projects. As mentioned
above, Cervantes wrote poetry throughout his whole life, starting with
his first attempts under the tutelage of López de Hoyos up to the 1614
Viaje del Parnaso and finally, Persiles y Sigismunda. This posthumous
novel includes one of his best lyric compositions, the remarkable sonnet
in chapter nine ‘Mar sesgo, viento largo, estrella clara’ [‘Calm sea, fair
wind, bright star’]19 that Isabel Lozano-Renieblas has analysed.
Cervantes indeed wrote all types and forms of poetry: academic,
serious, love, elegiac, burlesque, satirical, heroic, theatrical, narrative,
and pastoral. He also used most of the know meters of his day, in both
Italianate and popular Spanish forms, and excelled at sonnets, ballads,
and tercets, among other meters and strophes. In sum, he published
over 15,000 lyric verses, excluding his theatre; this represents a gold
mine for scholars who might find any of the following projects
compelling:
1. An annotated critical edition of Cervantes’s complete poetic
works, including his theatre. As mentioned, José Montero
Reguera and his team at the University of Vigo are currently
preparing such an edition.
2. Studies of metrics and prosody that examine Cervantes’s
particular rhyme schemes and poetic style.
3. Studies of lexicon to determine the singularity of his poetry
within its historical and literary context.
4. Analyses of his symbolic system, metaphorical structures,
language, and themes.
5. Studies of particular strophes: sonnets, ballads, octaves,
tercets.
6. A re-evaluation of his place among the poets of his generation.
7. Contextualization and in-depth examination of the poetry
contained in other works.
The hallmark of all Cervantine literature is the author’s profound
critical and intellectual depth, his seriousness of purpose, and
engagement with the principles of superior literature and writing, as
well as his on-going preoccupation with the intrinsic value of poetry.
The complexity of his verse reveals the same concern, as in his prose
and drama, with the ultimate meaning and function of literature to
entertain and elevate both the reader and the art of literature. This
conceptual richness is matched by a unique lyric style whose exegesis is
still overdue and crucial so that his poetry can take its proper place in
the Cervantine canon.
Works Cited
Alborg, Juan Luis. ‘La poesía de Cervantes’. In Cervantes by Alborg (Madrid:
Gredos, 1966).
Alcalá Galán, Mercedes. ‘Teoría de la poesía en Cervantes: Poesía citada en la
novela’. Calíope 2 (1999): pp. 27–43.
Alonso, Álvaro. ‘La Canción desesperada de Cervantes: cancioneros, modelos
italianos y sensibilidad romántica’. Cervantes y su tiempo, edited by Juan
Matas Caballero and José María Balcells Doménech (León: Universidad de
León, 2008): pp. 109–21.
Alonso Asenjo, Julio ‘Quijote y romances. Uso y funciones’. In Historia,
reescritura y pervivencia del Romancero. Estudios en memoria de Amelia García
Valdecasas, edited by Rafael Beltrán (Valencia: Universidad de Valencia,
2000), pp. 25–61.
Altamirano, Magdalena. ‘El romancero en la primera parte del Quijote’. Nueva
Revista de Filología Hispánica 45 (1997): pp. 321–36.
Altamirano, Magdalena, ‘El romancero en la segunda parte del Quijote’. In Actas
del XV Congreso Internacional de la Asociación Internacional de Hispanistas,
edited by Beatriz Mariscal, Blanca López de Mariscal, and María Teresa Miaja
(México: UNAM, UAM and El Colegio de México, 2006), pp. 15–31.
Álvarez, Emiliano. La poesía, señor hidalgo…Funciones de la poesía en el Quijote.
(Guanajuato: Universidad de Guanajuato, 2019).
Amorós, Andrés. ‘Los poemas del Quijote’. In Cervantes, su obra y su mundo: Actas
del I Congreso Internacional sobre Cervantes, edited by Manuel Criado de Val
(Madrid: EDI–6, 1981), pp. 707–15.
Arellano, Ignacio. ‘Visiones y símbolos emblemáticos en la poesía de Cervantes’.
Anales Cervantinos 34 (1998): pp. 169–212.
Badui de Zogbi, María Banura. ‘El valiente Escarramán. De la jácara al
entremés’. In Cervantes, Góngora y Quevedo. II Simposio Nacional Letras del
Siglo de Oro Español. 5, 6 y 7 de octubre de 1995 (Mendoza: Universidad
Nacional de Cuyo, 1977), pp. 115–25.
Blecua, José Manuel. ‘Garcilaso y Cervantes’. Cuadernos de Ínsula, I. Homenaje a
Cervantes (Madrid: Ínsula, 1947): pp. 141–50.
Blecua, José Manuel. ‘La poesía lírica de Cervantes.’ In Sobre poesía de la Edad
de Oro (Madrid: Gredos, 1970). Originally published under the pseudonym
J.M. Claube in Cuadernos de Ínsula, I. Homenaje a Cervantes (Madrid: Ínsula,
1947), pp. 151–87.
Bonilla 
y 
San 
Martín, 
Adolfo. 
‘¿Qué 
pensaron 
de 
Cervantes 
sus
contemporáneos?’. In Cervantes y su obra by Bonilla y San Martín (Madrid:
Francisco Beltrán, 1916), pp. 163–84.
Canavaggio, Jean. ‘Garcilaso en Cervantes: «¡Oh dulces prendas por mi mal
halladas!»‘. In Busquemos otros montes y otros ríos. Estudios de literatura
española del Siglo de Oro dedicados a Elias L. Rivers, edited by Brian Dutton and
Victoriano Roncero López (Madrid: Castalia, 1994), pp. 33–42.
Caso González, José Miguel. ‘Cervantes, del Manierismo al Barroco’. In
Homenaje a José Manuel Blecua, edited by Dámaso Alonso (Madrid: Gredos,
1983), pp. 141–50.
Castro, Adolfo de. ‘Cervantes ¿fue o no poeta?’. Semanario Pintoresco Español 45
(9 noviembre 1851): pp. 354–5.
Cernuda, Luis. ‘Cervantes, poeta’. In Poesía y literatura, II by Cernuda
(Barcelona: Seix Barral, 1964).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda, edited by Juan
Bautista Avalle-Arce (Madrid: Castalia, 1970).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Poesías, edited by Adrián J. Sáez (Madrid: Cátedra, 2016).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Viaje del Parnaso, Poesías completas I, edited by Vicente
Gaos (Madrid: Castalia, 1973).
Colón Calderón, Isabel. ‘Poesía y poetas en La Galatea’. Dicenda 14 (1996): pp.
79–92.
Diego, Gerardo. ‘Cervantes y la poesía’. Revista de Filología Española 32 (1948):
pp. 213–36.
Díez Fernández, J. Ignacio. ‘El soneto del rufián «arrepentido» (en dos series)’.
Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 17, no. 1 (1997): pp. 87–
108.
Díez de Revenga, Francisco Javier. ‘Cervantes poeta y su recepción por los
poetas de nuestro siglo’. Boletín de la Biblioteca Menéndez Pelayo 71 (1995):
pp. 25–47.
Díez de Revenga, Francisco Javier. ‘Petrarquismo en la lírica cervantina’. In El
Renacimiento italiano. Actas del II Congreso nacional de italianistas, Murcia,
1984 (Salamanca: Universidad de Salamanca, 1986), pp. 113–21.
Domínguez Caparrós, José. Métrica de Cervantes. (Alcalá de Henares: Centro de
Estudios Cervantinos, 2002).
D’Onofrio, Julia. ‘«fuese y no hubo nada». Cervantes frente a la manipulación y
la dilapidación simbólica’. Anales Cervantinos 46 (2014): pp. 161–78.
Egido, Aurora. ‘Los sonetos de Lope y Cervantes a Francisco Díaz, inventor de la
uretrotomía interna’. Anuario Lope de Vega 16 (2010): pp. 45–67.
Eisenberg, Daniel. ‘The Romance as Seen by Cervantes’. El Crotalón. Anuario de
Filología Española 1 (1984): pp. 177–92.
Fernández, Jaime, S.J. ‘La verdad del epitafio para la tumba de don Quijote’. In
Actas del XI Coloquio Internacional de la Asociación de Cervantistas. Seúl, 17–20
de noviembre de 2004, edited by Chul Park (Seoul: Universidad Hankuk de
Estudios Extranjeros, 2005), pp. 463–74.
Fernández de la Torre, José Luis. ‘Cervantes, poeta de festejos y certámenes’.
Anales Cervantinos 22 (1984): pp. 9–41.
Fernández de la Torre, José Luis. ‘Historia y poesía: algunos ejemplos de la
lírica “pública” en Cervantes’. Edad de Oro 6 (1987): pp. 115–31.
Fernández de Navarrete, Martín. Vida de Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra (Madrid:
Imprenta Real, 1819).
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James. The Life of Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra (London:
Chapman and Hall, 1892).
Gaos, Vicente. ‘Cervantes, poeta’. Cervantes. Novelista, dramaturgo, poeta
(Barcelona: Planeta, 1979).
Garrote Bernal, Gaspar. ‘Intertextualidad poética y funciones de la poesía en el
Quijote’. Dicenda. Cuadernos de Filología Hispánica 14 (1996): pp. 113–37.
González, Aurelio. ‘Cervantes y los temas del Romancero nuevo’. In Actas del III
Coloquio Internacional de la Asociación de Cervantistas (Barcelona: Anthropos,
1993), pp. 609–16.
Hens Pérez, L.E. ‘Aspectos a revisar en la poesía de Cervantes: las poesías
sueltas’. In Actas del III Coloquio Internacional de la Asociación de Cervantistas
(Barcelona: Anthropos, 1993): pp. 601–8.
Joly, Monique. ‘En torno a las antologías poéticas de La gitanilla y La ilustre
fregona’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 13, no. 2
(1993): pp. 5–15.
Lara Garrido, José. ‘Cervantes en un soneto, o el prodigio de la mirada
marginal’. 4 siglos os contemplan. Cervantes y el Quijote (Madrid: Eneida,
2006): pp. 61–78.
Lara Garrido, José. ‘Sonetos epicédicos en homenaje del «Divino» Herrera. El
rastro tenue de una fama póstuma’. Analecta Malacitana, Anejo 26. Relieves
poéticos del Siglo de Oro. De los textos al contexto (Málaga: Universidad de
Málaga, 1999): pp. 111–47.
Lerner, Isaías. ‘Acerca de la poesía de Cervantes’. In Lecturas de Cervantes, by
Lerner (Málaga: Universidad de Málaga, 2005): pp. 259–68.
Lewis Galanes, Adriana. ‘Cervantes: el poeta en su tiempo’. Cervantes, su obra y
su mundo: Actas del I Congreso Internacional sobre Cervantes, edited by Manuel
Criado de Val (Madrid: EDI–6, 1981): pp. 159–78.
Lewis Galanes, Adriana. ‘El soneto “Vuela mi estrecha y débil esperanza”: texto,
contextos y entramado intertexual’. Nueva Revista de Filología Hispánica 38,
no. 2 (1990): pp. 675–91.
Lokos, Ellen D. The Solitary Journey. Cervantes’s Voyage to Parnassus (New York:
Peter Lang, 1991).
Lozano-Renieblas, Isabel. ‘«Mar sesgo, viento largo, estrella clara» o la metáfora
de la Nave de amor en el Persiles’. Anales Cervantinos 36 (2004): pp. 299–308.
Luis, Leopoldo de. ‘Apuntes para dos sonetos de Cervantes’. Anales Cervantinos
25–26 (1987–8): pp. 269–73.
Márquez Villanueva, Francisco. ‘La buenaventura de Preciosa’. Nueva Revista de
Filología Hispánica 34 (1978–9): pp. 741–68.
Martín, Adrienne L. ‘El soneto cervantino a la muerte de Herrera: texto y
contexto’. Anales Cervantinos 23 (1985): pp. 213–19.
Martín, Adrienne L. ‘Un modelo para el humor poético cervantino: los sonetos
burlescos del Quijote’. In Actas del Primer Coloquio Internacional de la
Asociación de Cervantistas. Alcalá de Henares 29/30 nov.–1/2 dic. 1988
(Barcelona: Anthropos, 1990), pp. 349–56.
Martín, Adrienne Laskier. Cervantes and the Burlesque Sonnet (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1991).
Mata Induráin, Carlos. ‘Elementos religiosos en la poesía de Cervantes’. In
Cervantes y las religiones, edited by Ruth Fine and Santiago López Navía
(Madrid: Iberoamericana/Vervuert, 2008), pp. 175–98.
Mata Induráin, Carlos. ‘Los dos sonetos a la pérdida de la goleta (Quijote, I, 40)
en el contexto de la historia del capitán cautivo’. RILCE 23, no. 1 (2007): pp.
169–83.
Menéndez Pelayo, Marcelino. ‘Cervantes considerado como poeta’. In Estudios y
discursos de crítica histórica y literaria I (1873; Madrid: Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas, 1942), pp. 257–68.
Montero Reguera, José. ‘A partir de dos sonetos del Quijote: estructura y ritmo
del endecasílabo cervantino’. Ínsula 700–01 (2005): p. 35.
Montero Reguera, José. ‘Heterodoxias poéticas cervantinas (Prolegómenos para
una edición crítica de la poesía de Miguel de Cervantes)’. In Ortodoxia y
heterodoxia en Cervantes, edited by Carmen Rivero Iglesias (Alcalá de Henares:
Centro de Estudios Cervantinos, 2011), pp. 245–71.
Montero Reguera, José. ‘La gitanilla: una rei-vindicación de la poesía’. Ínsula
799–800 (julio–agosto 2013): pp. 34–6.
Montero Reguera, José. ‘Los poemas carmelitanos de Miguel de Cervantes’. In In
labore requies. Homenaje de la región Ibérica Carmelitana a los padres Pablo
Garrido y Balbino Velasco Bayón, edited by Fernando Millán Romeral (Roma:
Edizioni Carmelitane, 2007), pp. 659–66.
Montero Reguera, José. ‘La poesía. Hacia una nueva edición’. In Los textos de
Cervantes, edited by Daniel Fernández Rodríguez (Madrid: Centro para la
Edición de los Clásicos Españoles, 2013), pp. 119–63.
Montero Reguera, José. ‘Poesías para un poeta’. In XVIII Coloquio Cervantino
International (Guanajuato: Museo Iconográfico del Quijote, Fundación
Cervantina de México y Centro de Estudios Cervantinos, 2008), pp. 265–99.
Montero Reguera, José. ‘Poeta ilustre, o al menos manifico. Reflexiones sobre el
saber poético de Cervantes en el Quijote’. Anales Cervantinos 36 (2004): pp.
37–56.
Montero Reguera, José. ‘Trayectoria del epitafio en la poesía cervantina’.
eHumanista/Cervantes 1 (2012): pp. 388–410.
Montero Reguera, José, Fernando Romo Feito, Macarena Cuiñas Gómez,
Cristina Collazo Gómez and Alexia Dotras Bravo. ‘La edición de la poesía de
Miguel de Cervantes’. In Comentarios a Cervantes. Actas selectas del VIII
Congreso Internacional de la Asociación de Cervantistas, Oviedo, 11–15 de junio
de 2012, edited by Emilio Martínez Mata and María Fernández Ferreiro
(Asturias: Fundación María Cristina Masaveu Peterson, 2014), pp. 124–38.
Olay Valdés, Rodrigo. ‘Reconsideración de la poesía cervantina: los defectos
métricos y estilísticos de Cervantes’. Anales Cervantinos 45 (2013): pp. 293–
324.
Pedraza Jiménez, Felipe B. ‘De Quevedo a Cervantes: la génesis de la jácara’.
Edad de Oro Cantabrigense. Actas del VII Congreso de la Asociación Internacional
del Siglo de Oro (AISO), edited by Anthony Close (Madrid: Iberoamericana
Vervuert/AISO, 2006), pp. 77–88.
Prieto, Antonio. ‘Cervantes poeta’. La poesía española del siglo XVI, II by Prieto
(Madrid: Cátedra, 1987): pp. 723–36.
Profeti, Maria Grazia. ‘Cervantes enjuicia su obra: autodesviaciones lúdico-
críticas’. In Desviaciones lúdicas en la crítica cervantina: Actas del I Convivio
Internacional de «Locos amenos», edited by Antonio Bernat Vistarini and José
María Casasayas (Palma de Mallorca/Salamanca: Universitat de les Illes
Balears/Universidad de Salamanca, 1999), pp. 423–42.
Randel, Mary Gaylord. ‘La poesía y los poetas en los entremeses de Cervantes’.
Anales Cervantinos 20 (1982): pp. 173–203.
Randel, Mary Gaylord. ‘The Language of Limits and the Limits of Language: The
Crisis of Poetry in La Galatea’. Modern Language Notes 97 (1982): pp. 254–71.
Rey Hazas, Antonio. ‘Cervantes, Góngora y el Entremés de los romances’. In
Poética de la libertad y otras claves cervantinas by Rey Hazas (Madrid: Eneida,
2005), pp. 83–176.
Rivers, Elias L. ‘Cervantes, poeta serio y burlesco’. In Cervantes, edited by
Anthony Close et al. (Madrid: Centro de Estudios Cervantinos, 1995), pp.
211–24.
Rivers, Elias L. ‘Cervantes y Garcilaso’. Cervantes, su obra y su mundo: Actas del I
Congreso Internacional sobre Cervantes, edited by Manuel Criado de Val
(Madrid: EDI–6, 1981): pp. 963–8.
Rivers, Elias L. ‘«Viaje del Parnaso» y poesías sueltas’. In Suma Cervantina,
edited by Juan Bautista Avalle-Arce and E.C. Riley (London: Tamesis, 1973),
pp. 119–46.
Rojas, Ricardo. Cervantes (Cervantes, poeta lírico. Cervantes, poeta dramático.
Cervantes, poeta épico) (Buenos Aires: Losada, 1948).
Rojas, Ricardo. ‘De Cervantes considerado como poeta lírico’. Introduction to
Poesías de Cervantes (Buenos Aires: Universidad Nacional de La Plata, 1916).
Romo Feito, Fernando. ‘Cervantes ante la palabra lírica’. In Volver a Cervantes,
Actas del IV Congreso Internacional de la Asociación de Cervantistas, vol. II,
edited by A. Bernat Vistarini (Palma de Mallorca: Universitat de les Illes
Balears, 2001), pp. 1063–88.
Romo Feito, Fernando. ‘Cervantes ante la palabra lírica: el Quijote’. Anales
Cervantinos 44 (2012): pp. 133–58.
Romo Feito, Fernando. ‘Cervantes ante la palabra lírica: El teatro’. In Cervantes y
el mundo del teatro, edited by Héctor Brioso Santos (Kassel: Reichenberger,
2007): pp. 39–69.
Rossi de Castillo, Silvia T. ‘Presencia de la lírica tradicional en los Entremeses de
Miguel de Cervantes’. In Simposio Nacional Letras del Siglo de Oro Español.
Anejo IX, Revista de Literaturas Modernas 26 al 28 de septiembre 1991. Tomo I
(Mendoza, Argentina: Universidad Nacional de Cuyo, 1994), pp. 63–75.
Ruiz Pérez, Pedro. ‘Contexto crítico de la poesía cervantina’. Cervantes: Bulletin
of the Cervantes Society of America 17, no. 1 (1997): pp. 62–86.
Ruiz Pérez, Pedro. ‘El manierismo en la poesía de Cervantes’. Edad de Oro 4
(1985): pp. 165–77.
Talens, Jenaro. ‘Poetry as Autobiography: Theory and Poetic Practice in
Cervantes’. In Autobiography in Early Modern Spain, edited by Nicholas
Spadaccini and Jenaro Talens, Hispanic Issues 2 (Minneapolis: The Prisma
Institute, 1988).
Valbuena Prat, ‘Cervantes, poeta’. In Historia de la literatura española, vol. 2, by
Valbuena Prat (Barcelona: Gustavo Gili, 1968).
Wagschal, Steven. ‘Digging up the Past: The Archeology of Emotion in
Cervantes’ «Romance de los celos»‘. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society
of America 27, no. 2 (2007): pp. 213–27.
Ynduráin, Francisco. ‘Estudio Preliminar, Cervantes y el teatro’. In Obras
completas de Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra, Obras dramáticas II (Madrid: Atlas,
1972).
Ynduráin, Francisco. ‘La poesía de Cervantes: aproximaciones’. Edad de Oro 4
(1985): pp. 211–35.
1 Cervantes, Viaje del Parnaso, p 103. All translations from the original
Spanish are by the author of this chapter.
2 Cervantes, Viaje del Parnaso, p. 54.
3 See Profeti and Sáez (Cervantes, Poesías, p. 11–19) for updated discussions
of the ironic nature of these verses.
4 See Díez de Revenga on Cervantes’s reception by the poets of the
Generation of 27.
5 See Rojas, Poesías de Cervantes, González, and Romo Feito, ‘Cervantes
ante…’ on Fernández de Navarrete’s opinion.
6 Romo Feito, ‘Cervantes ante…’, p. 1066.
7 Romo Feito, ‘Cervantes ante…’, p. 134.
8 Regarding this edition in progress, see Montero Reguera et al., ‘La
edición…’.
9 Similarly, Ellen Lokos’s monograph is still the only book-length study on
Viaje del Parnaso.
10 Cervantes, Viaje del Parnaso, p. 103.
11 On Cervantes’s ballads, see González. On the ballads in Don Quixote, see
Altamirano’s articles.
12 Quoted in Rivers, ‘«Viaje del Parnaso»…’, p. 121.
13 Montero Reguera, ‘Heterodoxias poéticas…’, p. 246.
14 On Preciosa’s ballad see Márquez Villanueva.
15 On the function of ballads in Cervantes’s interludes, see Randel, ‘La
poesía…’ and Rossi de Castillo.
16 Gurapas is an underworld slang term for galleys, to which criminals were
condemned to row as punishment for their crimes. See the episode of the galley
slaves in Don Quixote I.22.
17 On this poem and its antecedents, see Badui de Zogbi. On the etymology of
the term and the general characteristics and development of the jácara, see
Pedraza Jiménez.
18 I study these poems and Cervantes’s skill in creating deliberately bad verse
in Cervantes and the Burlesque Sonnet.
19 Cervantes, Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda, p. 96.
Chapter 21
Confessing on the Move
Viaje del Parnaso and ‘Adjunta al Parnaso’
(1614)
Esther Fernández Rodríguez
Rice University
As part of his self-portrait in the prologue to the Novelas ejemplares—
completed by 1612—Cervantes mentions Viaje del Parnaso as a
completed seminal work in his literary trajectory:
Este que veis aquí, de rostro aguileño, de cabello castaño, frente lisa y
desembarazada, de alegres ojos y de nariz corva, aunque bien
proporcionada…este, digo, que es el rostro del autor de La Galatea y de
Don Quijote de la Mancha, y del que hizo el Viaje del Parnaso, a
imitación del de César Caporal perusino, y otras obras que andan por
ahí descarriadas y quizás sin el nombre de su dueño, llámase
comúnmente Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra.1
[This man you see before you, with aquiline features, chestnut coloured
hair, smooth, unwrinkled brow, bright eyes, and curved though well-
proportioned nose…This, then, is a description of the author of La
Galatea and Don Quixote de la Mancha, and the man who wrote Journey
to Parnassus, which was modelled on the one by César Caporal Perusino,
and other works which have gone astray, perhaps without their owner’s
name upon them. He is commonly known as Miguel de Cervantes
Saavedra.]2
Indeed, Cervantes wrote Viaje in 1612, but it is not until two years
later, in 1614, that he composed the prose epilogue ‘Adjunta al
Parnaso’. Even though Viaje has been relegated to the status of a minor
work within Cervantine literature, in its day it must have had a strong
personal significance, and it was well received. Indeed, Cervantes
composed Viaje towards the end of his life, a critical moment since not
only was he ill and impoverished, he was also trying to complete his
Novelas ejemplares, the second part of Don Quixote, and Los trabajos de
Persiles y Sigismunda.3 The fact that he devoted time and energy to
complete Viaje meant that Cervantes wanted to leave us with a personal
testimony of his experience as a writer and a record of his artistic and
aesthetic values.
According to Correa, one possible reason for the marginalization of
this work in recent literary history is the lack of understanding of the
poem by early twentieth-century scholars who tended to narrow their
interest and criticism to the list of poets mentioned by Cervantes, the
mythological figures, and the negative judgment of the author’s poetic
abilities.4 The widespread belief that Cervantes was a bad poet was a
judgment that he himself was responsible for disseminating in some of
his works. In Viaje, for example, the verses, ‘Yo, que siempre trabajo y
me desvelo/por parecer que tengo de poeta/la gracia que no quiso
darme el cielo’5 [I, who do toil and strain my being whole/to shrew,
what Heaven’s grace will not allow’]6 were taken quite literally by his
contemporaries who, envying his mastery of prose, were eager to
disparage his poetic skills.7
Although Viaje was widely read in its time, it is possible that the
negative publicity concerning Cervantes’s poetic talent has been the
reason for the publication of so few editions in subsequent centuries.
Indeed, after the first edition appeared in Madrid in 1614, another is
known to have been published in Milan in 1624. Apart from another
reprinting in the eighteenth century, we would have to wait until the
nineteenth century for Viaje to emerge again as a substantial piece
thanks to new editions, translations, and critical studies.8 This
resurgence of Viaje was accompanied by praise that considered it ‘a
serious work of criticism’ in José Miguel Guardia’s words, and the
second best work by Cervantes after Don Quixote according to Federick
Bouterwek and James Y. Gibson.9 Moreover, in recent decades, it seems
that scholars have been more willing to re-evaluate the literary,
autobiographical, social, and even dramatic value of Viaje, as
demonstrated by a whole array of new critical studies, as well as by the
first and only staging of a theatrical version, directed by Spanish
director Eduardo Vasco for the Spanish National Classical Theatre
Company in 2005.
Figure 21.1 Cervantes begins his journey to Mount Parnassus. Photographer
Daniel Alonso. Centro de documentación teatral (CDT), Instituto Nacional de
las Artes Escénicas y de la Música (INAEM).
A Literary Journey
Viaje del Parnaso is composed of eight chapters in linked tercets,
followed by an epilogue in prose that functions as a kind of summary of
the themes discussed throughout the poem. In the first chapter, the
protagonist, inspired by the example of Cesare Caporali, leaves a
provincial Madrid to seek higher fortune in an imaginary voyage to
Mount Parnassus (see Figure 21.1)—the symbolic land of poets
governed by Apollo and the Muses. Once he arrives in Cartagena,
Apollo’s messenger asks Cervantes for help defending the mythological
mountain against an avalanche of poetasters. The strategic plan is to
recruit an entire army of the best contemporary Spanish poets to face
the imminent invasion of bad poetry.
Figure 
21.2 Rain of poets. Photographer Daniel Alonso. Centro de
documentación teatral (CDT), Instituto Nacional de las Artes Escénicas y de la
Música (INAEM).
Cervantes then boards an allegorical ship constructed of verses,
stanzas, and literary forms. His first duty is to give feedback on a long
list of Iberian poets compiled by Apollo and to select the very best
ones. The second chapter is entirely dedicated to reviewing the merits
of each of the 130 poets, the chosen ones of whom will begin to
magically rain from the heavens (see Figure 21.2).
The third chapter begins with the sea voyage to Parnassus. The ship
makes a first stop on the Mediterranean coast to pick up four of the
very best Valencian poets—Luis Ferrer, Guillén de Castro, Cristóbal de
Virúes, and Gaspar Aguilar. Once the ship sets sail again, heading
towards Italy, Cervantes refuses to carry a message from Mercury to the
Argensola brothers, two of the poets that the Count of Lemos chose as
part of his select artistic entourage to Naples—a painful episode with
strong personal ties for Cervantes, as we will examine later. Once the
ship finally lands, Apollo, the Muses, and the Hours come out to greet
the legion of poets who, after drinking and bathing in the Castalian
Spring, find their respective seats on Mount Parnassus, all except
Cervantes. As a consequence, the fourth chapter starts with the
protagonist’s lament on the lack of recognition for his literary legacy.
True poetry, then, makes her appearance as an allegorical beautiful
maid.
The fifth chapter narrates the humorous episode between Neptune
and Venus. Whereas Neptune attempts to sink a ship of poetasters
approaching Mount Parnassus, Venus intercedes in a seductive attempt
to dissuade him from his purposes. Finally, the goddess succeeds in
turning the poets into gourds and wineskins to save them from
drowning. In Chapter Six, the allegorical character of Vainglory appears
to the protagonist as a dream vision that contrasts with the figure of
true poetry. Apollo then delivers an inspiring military discourse to
persuade his army to initiate the battle against the bad poets that will
take place in the next chapter. The various projectiles employed in this
poetic war are not bullets, grenades, or bombs, but all sorts of literary
materials such as novels, sonnets, and satires, among others. Chapter
Eight describes the victory of the good poets who, after bidding
farewell to Poetry, fall into a collective slumber induced by Morpheus.
Upon awakening, the protagonist finds himself magically carried out to
the festivities organized in 1612 by the Count of Villamediana and the
Count of Lemos in Naples, and immediately thereafter, he finds himself
back in Madrid, exactly where his journey began. The ‘Adjunta al
Parnaso’ brings the journey to an end but expands on the themes
presented in Viaje as a follow up of the poem.
Intertextual Encounters
The plot outlined above is inspired by a vast array of classical and
contemporary sources, which render Cervantes’s Viaje a rich
intertextual piece. The author, for his part, adds to these antecedents a
large dose of creativity, which makes him succeed in appropriating a
very popular subgenre in Spain and Italy at the time, that of the
‘Journeys to Parnassus’. Among the features that distinguish this
specific genre, Lokos identifies a set of crucial characteristics: 1) the
protagonist’s otherworldly objective; 2) the mythological guide and the
human disciple; 3) the act of drinking from the Hippocrene fountain as
a purification ritual; 4) the visit to the temple of Eternity; and 5) the
ascending formal structure of the journey.10 In theory, this subgenre
could potentially follow two opposite styles: the serious version of the
Greek and Latin classics or the burlesque style of the Menippean satire
that extends back to Seneca,11 passing through Aristophanes and Lucian
of Samosata and up to Cesare Caporali, the direct source for Viaje.12
Cervantes proves himself to be a true connoisseur of this genre, since
instead of blindly adhering to its specifics he consciously makes use of
them, whether by imitation, subversion, or mindful omission. At this
point, it would be possible to put together an exhaustive catalogue of
the particularities for each of the stanzas, although that would be
beyond the purpose of this study. Therefore, I will limit myself to
providing an overview of the Italian and Spanish sources of Viaje that
have received the most thorough examination in Cervantine
scholarship.13
The most evident Italian precedent is the aforementioned Viaggio di
Parnaso (1582) by Caporali, as Cervantes himself points out in the very
first tercet of the poem:
Un quídam Caporal italiano
de patria perusino, a lo que entiendo,
de ingenio griego y de valor romano,
llevado de un capricho reverendo,
le vino en voluntad ir a Parnaso,
por huir de la corte el vario estruendo.
Solo y a pie partióse, y paso a paso
llegó donde compró una mula antigua,
de color parda y tartamudo paso
[A certain Caporal, as I am told,
Italian, and by birth a Perusine,
in wit a Greek, and like a Roman bold,
led by a whim, a worthy one, I ween,
to mount Parnassus fain would set his face,
to flee the court, its turmoil and chagrin.
Alone, on foot, he slowly reached a place
where an old mule he brought him for the tour,
of Steel-grey colour, and of jog-trot pace]14
Vicente Gaos specifies that Cervantes was most inspired by the
appendix in Caporali’s poem, entitled ‘Aviisi di Parnaso’ [‘Notices from
Parnassus’].15 This section, specifically, narrates the war by Apollo,
which, with the aid of some of the most illustrious Italian poets—Pietro
Bembo, Ludovico Ariosto, Francesco Berni, Pietro Aretino, and
Giovanni della Casa, among others—defended good poetry against an
army of ignorant poets.
Notwithstanding, the main difference between the two works is that
Cervantes involves himself at a very personal level in the narration,
whereas Caporali remains much more distant and uninvolved
throughout his poem, as Rivers has point out:
The great difference between Caporali’s poem and Cervantes’s, as Croce
suggested long ago and Canavaggio has been the first critic to point out,
is that Caporali remains within the limits of a purely burlesque
stylization of the Dantesque model: he does not get involved seriously
or 
personally. 
Cervantes, 
on 
the 
other 
hand, 
introduces
autobiographical data and creates an image of himself as a man and as
a poet thinking about poetry.16
Indeed, in Caporali’s poem, the narrator arrives at Mount Parnassus
after travelling by land and sea. Upon his arrival he meets a multitude
of poets attempting to climb the sacred mountain. With the help of an
allegorical character named Capricho and a commendation from
Cardinal Medici, the protagonist is the only one to reach the top. Once
there, Poetic License leads him to a palace made of literary forms
where a group of famous Italian poets deliberate on whether or not to
grant him admission. Once he is finally admitted and about to take a
seat, he goes outside to look for his mule and suddenly finds himself
alone and once again far away from Parnassus.
Although the influence of Caporali is undeniable, for Lokos, the fact
that Cervantes mentions Caporali’s Viaggio up front should be
interpreted as a strategy to conceal a much more complex list of
literary predecessors:
Cervantes would like to convince the average reader, at least initially,
that the Viaje is just another generic text. In reality, the Viaje draws
upon many different models and traditions, forming a composite text
which radically ruptures the generic equation so closely followed by
Caporali. The poem does indeed have a traceable ancestry in the
continuum of literary history, however, Cervantes’s is much more
complicated than he would have us believe.17
Among these other possible Italian sources, Lokos thinks that the
contemporary model that Cervantes followed more closely was I
Ragguagli di Parnaso [News from Parnassus] (1612) by Traiano Boccalini.
This is a satire of contemporary artists as well as a commentary on the
essence of true poetry and the nature of poets, two thematic lines that
seem obvious in Viaje.18
If we look further into the past, another Italian antecedent that
could have influenced Viaje was the ‘Carta a Gianiacopo Lionardi’ by
Pietro Aretino (1536), a satirical text that narrates an imaginary
journey to Parnassus.19 Our author was also undoubtedly aware of
Dante’s Divina Commedia (1472): ‘Dantean characteristics found in the
Viaje are much deeper than one would suppose at first glance’.20
Beyond, the obvious terza rima and the allegorical nature of both
works, Dante’s ‘dark jungle’ populated by ferocious beasts finds its
parallel in Viaje in the image of the poetasters climbing the Mountain
and Dante’s guide, Virgil, finds his counterpart in Mercury within
Cervantes’s poem.21 Rivers also finds a crucial similarity between these
two works insofar as they both narrate imaginary trips as an excuse for
the two authors to think about their own personal experiences and the
social and intellectual milieu that surrounded them. The only major
difference is that Dante’s tone is serious whereas Cervantes’s is highly
burlesque:
[F]ormally speaking, the Viaje del Parnaso is a conventional literary
fiction, the story of an imaginary trip that the man Cervantes did not
take to Parnassus. Yet the author is named Cervantes and so is the
narrator and so is the protagonist of the imaginary trip. Our most
familiar model for this kind of fiction is Dante’s Divine Comedy, in which
the author writes a poem in which the narrator named Dante, tells how
he, Dante, took a trip through Hell, Purgatory and Heaven. But Caporali
and Cervantes make a burlesque use of Dante’s serious fictional
model.22
These exploratory journeys through the mythological world are also
present in other works of Spanish literature that have been influential
for Cervantes. For example, Viaje de Sannio [Sannio’s Journey] (1585)
by Juan de la Cueva narrates the trip undertaken by Sannio to visit
Jupiter in order to request the recognition he thinks he deserves for his
literary merits. Whereas Sannio finally returns to the terrestrial world
triumphant and hopeful for his achievements, the return to reality for
the protagonist of Viaje is much more bitter and disheartening.23 El
Bernardo, written by Bernardo de Balbuena around 1610 and published
in 1624, was also a possible literary model for the invasion of the
mountain lead by bad poets. In this epic poem, the protagonist,
Bernardo, defends Mount Parnassus against a besieging army of
monsters. Apollo eventually escorts him to the top of the mountain and
takes him to a palace, but when water is thrown into his face he
suddenly wakes up back in his cave, although his drenched face
suggests that his adventure was not just a dream.
In addition to the ascent of Parnassus, the condemnation of artistic
mediocrity, and the literary battle, the ship that Mercury uses to
transport the poets in Cervantes’s Viaje—entirely build with verses and
literary forms—has a possible source in the tragicomedy Nao de Amores
[Ship of Love] (1527) by Gil Vicente. In this play, the author describes
an allegorical ship composed in its entirety of feelings and emotions.24
Another fantastic galley that may have inspired Cervantes is the poem
from the early seventeenth century by Pedro Rodríguez de Ardila, Baco
y sus bodas en España [Bacchus and his Wedding Feast in Spain].25 In this
case, the ship is built entirely of vegetable matter. Lastly, another
Spanish source that is clearly identifiable in Cervantes’s Viaje is El cisne
de Apolo [Apollo’s Swan] (1602) by Luis Alfonso de Carvallo, a work
that had a broad impact on our author’s final creative period. Carvallo’s
piece is a defence of poetry in the form of a dialogue between Carvallo,
the allegorical character Reading, and Zoilo. The three of them discuss
a wide array of topics that range from poetic decorum, the purpose of
poetry, inspiration, creativity, and patronage, among others. For
Geoffrey Stagg, this meticulous analysis of the essence of poetry must
have been of profound interest for Cervantes for his conception of
Viaje.26
To summarize, the importance of this expansive network of literary
sources demonstrates a rich and complex intertextuality and the ability
of Viaje to escape categorization within a single genre. Instead its
kaleidoscopic nature makes it a work that navigates with fluidity
among the different literary traditions and genres:
The majority of modern critical approaches to the poem pigeonhole it
into a narrow generic category, labelling it according to a salient
characteristic, though these discussions of particular aspects of the
poem are certainly useful, I suggest that this approach of pulling apart
the generic fabric of the poem strand by strand in order to separate into
its component parts must necessarily yield an insufficient and distorted
vision of the whole. A faithful global characterization of the Viaje must
respect its generic diversity.27
Within this framework of multiple sources, I would like to highlight
three dimensions tightly interrelated throughout Viaje that give us three
different points of entry in its interpretation: (1) the social and literary
critique, (2) the autobiographical referents, and (3) the mythological
satire.
Kaleidoscopic Possibilities and Readings
The first dimension we will examine in Viaje is that of literary and
social criticism, which Cervantes strategically disseminates throughout
his work drawing on satire, irony, and emblematic language. In this
sense, Viaje becomes a very personal analysis of the essence of true
poetry, the different ways to interpret it, and the methods by which the
poet should relate to his art and his expectations from it. In order to
communicate to the reader what true poetry is, Cervantes resorts to the
use of two oppositional allegorical figures that personify and contrast
good and bad poetry:
Esta, que es la Poesía verdadera.
la grave, la discreta la elegante,
dijo Mercurio, la alta y la sincera,
siempre con vestidura rozagante
se muestra en cualquier acto que se halla,
cuando a su profesión es importante.
Nunca se inclina o sirve a la canalla
trovadora, maligna y trafalmeja,
que en lo que más ignora menos calla.
Hay otra falsa, ansiosa, torpe y vieja,
amiga de sonaja y morteruelo
que ni tabanco, ni taberna deja.
No se alza dos ni aun coto del suelo,
grande amiga de bodas y bautismos,
larga de manos y corta de cerbelo.
Tómala por momentos parosismos;
No acierta a pronunciar y, si pronuncia
absurdos hace y forma solecismos.
Baco donde ella está su gusto anuncia
y ella derrama en coplas el poleo,
compa y vereda, y el mastranzo y juncia.
[That Poesy the true, the grave, discreet,
the elegant, the lofty, and the pure,
should robe herself in vesture that is meet
for all the actions which her rank become,
for each in turn appropriate and complete;
She never stoops to serve the common scum
of ballad mongers, impudent and mean,
who bawl the loudest when they should be dumb.
There is a false, a base, old, haggard quean,
friend of the drum and timbrel mummery
seldom from bench or tavern to be seen;
Hardly two hand-breaths from the floor springs she,
at weddings and at baptisms she sits,
though huge her fists, her brains but scanty be;
At times she falleth into sudden fits,
cannot articulate, or if she can,
her blundering grammar proves her muddled wits;
Her tastes are those of Bacchus and his clan,
and in her couplets, over mead and wold,
she scatters thyme and mint and gentian.]28
On one hand, there is the classical, or Horatian poetry, based on the
poet’s erudition and selfless vocation that promote a spiritual
appreciation on the part of the reader.29 This genuine lyricism contrasts
with a poetry that is falsely governed by a poet’s zealous vanity and
economic success, and consequently, is intended to satisfy rich patrons.
That is to say, it represents a sort of superficial poetry in which literary
principles are relegated to a secondary status in order to privilege fame,
literary prestige, and economic profit.
As Lokos has pointed out, at the heart of this dichotomy lays a
veiled criticism of literary academies. Whereas in Italy these academies
were real intellectual gatherings, open to constructive criticism and
debate to help improving the quality of writers’ skills and literary
production, the Spanish ones were conceived from a very different
angle. Indeed they were merely endogamic social circles at the service
of a group of pseudo-poets whose literary production and taste was of
questionable quality.30 It is significant that Cervantes wrote his Viaje
when three academies were functioning simultaneously in Madrid.31 In
those lines, the fact that Cervantes mentions 130 poets throughout his
Viaje is no more than an ironic vision of the massive number of bad
writers that were circulating among these academies: ‘Were there ever
130 poets deserving of the title? This is the fundamental question
Cervantes poses to us in his Viaje del Parnaso regarding the ephemeral
academies where dozens of Madrid residents would read his verses to
one another’.32 This large list of poets has also been interpreted by
Lokos as a mockery of encomiastic poetry, a genre whose main
objective is to praise illustrious poets and with which Cervantes had
previously experimented in ‘Canto de Calíope’ in the pastoral romance
of La Galatea (1585). Whereas the normal number of authors named in
an encomiastic poem was about thirty, the inclusion in Viaje of over
four times that number functions as a way to subvert and trivialize the
original genre.33
Cervantes also includes a veiled criticism of the mediocre quality of
poetry that was sweeping the intellectual circles at the time. According
to Gaos this is reflected in the repetitive meter of the poem as well as in
its apparently chaotic structure. The linked tercets, which critics such
as Rodríguez Marín, Schevill and Bonilla so reproached for their lyrical
simplicity, function in Viaje as a stylistic strategy for denouncing bad
poetry and the writers responsible for it: ‘The inherent monotony of the
linked tercets, as well as the multiple uses of the word éste, the
disordered enumerations, the common places, and other similar
features, all thoroughly expose the general mediocrity of the praised
poets’.34 It should be clear by now that Cervantes interweaves literary
and social criticism in both the content and the form of his poem,
creating a dense and sarcastic literary fabric that denounces how bad
poets are complicit in spreading poetic mediocrity and lowering the
standards of one of the highest art forms.
The second dimension of the poem is its autobiographical breadth,35
strongly connected to the social and literary criticism with which
Cervantes infuses his poem from beginning to end. Indeed, Cervantes’s
frustration arises from a personal disconnection between the
intellectual and aesthetic currents of the era that seemed to cause
impediments in the understanding his literary achievements, and hence
not receiving the well-deserved recognition he expected for his works.
In addition, his hopes of returning to Italy around 1608 with the Count
of Lemos, recently named Viceroy of Naples, were truncated when
Lemos decided not to take Cervantes with him. As a great lover and
champion of the arts, the new Viceroy planned to bring with him some
of the most prominent writers, and Cervantes was hoping to be one of
them. Instead, he chose Antonio Mira de Amescua and the Argensola
brothers (Lupercio and Bartolomé), who made it their business to
isolate Lemos from any writer who might provide competition.36
Consequently, Cervantes seeing his hopes exasperated—even though
the first part of Don Quixote (1605) was an immediate success—felt
isolated in an artistic milieu where Horatian and Aristotelian principles
were eclipsed by a superficial poetry dictated by favouritism.
At the same time, Lope de Vega had monopolized the theatre
industry by the unstoppable popularity of his plays based on the new
dramatic principles of the Arte nuevo de hacer comedias (1609).
Cervantes, therefore, could not find a niche as a playwright. The
literary competition between Lope and Cervantes is made obvious in
Viaje through Lope’s ‘special’ treatment within the long list of
mentioned poets: 37
Llovió otra nube al gran Lope de Vega,
poeta insigne, a cuyo verso o prosa
ninguno le aventaja, ni aun le llega.
[Another cloud rained down that poet grand,
Lope de Vega, whom in prose or verse
None can surpass, nor one beside him stand.]38
The majority of critical interpretations of these verses have considered
them verbatim, that is to say, as a glorious praise of the playwright, but
Lokos perceives in them as a masked criticism. Lope’s strategic place on
the list, surrounded before and after by bad poets, the detail that he
falls from a cloud by himself—an emblematic symbol of ignorance and
superficiality—and the fact that he is not mentioned again in the poem,
all suggest a slight against Lope’s artistic and aesthetic values.39 While
Lope de Vega’s mention is a key part of Cervantes’s social and literary
criticism, it is at the same time profoundly rooted in his sense of
personal and professional isolation in Spain, where contemporary
literary and aesthetic currents no longer conformed to his artistic
ideals.
Figure 21.3 Poets embarked in the ship. Photographer Daniel Alonso. Centro de
documentación teatral (CDT), Instituto Nacional de las Artes Escénicas y de la
Música (INAEM).
Even though we could argue that these particularities are framed
within the autobiographical dimension, the question remains: can we
consider Viaje to be an autobiography in the strict sense of the term?
Jean Canavaggio analyses the degree to which the poem fits this
category. Canavaggio takes as his starting point Philippe Lejeune’s
theoretical principles on autobiography, starting with its more basic
definition: a ‘retrospective narrative in prose that a historical being
creates about his or her own existence’.40 Even though Viaje is a poem
in verse and the visit to Parnassus is no more than an imaginary
adventure, these two aspects become secondary in relation to the
coincidence of the identity between the author and the narrator, and
the narrator and the protagonist. For Canavaggio, Cervantes embodies
each of these roles and creates a ‘self’ endowed with various
perspectives, 
and 
therefore, 
a 
multidimensional 
presence.41
Furthermore, no matter how fantastic the visit to Parnassus might seem
(see Figure 21.3), the author-narrator-protagonist never abandons
entirely the real world, as proven by the specific geographical
references, many of which are emotionally charged and consequently
locate the poetic ‘self’ within ‘the framework of his daily existence’.42
Within this autobiographical dimension, Rivers has even identified in
Viaje certain typical features proper to the picaresque novel. For
example, in addition to the first-person narrative, the theme of hunger
—the basic motivation for picaresque heroes—has been appropriated
by Cervantes from an allegorical perspective:
Just as Lazarillo counted the hours as he walked the streets of Toledo
with his squire, who deliberately avoided the subject of food,
Cervantes’s narrator-protagonist similarly suffers physiological hunger
in the face of the spiritual indifference displayed by Apollo Delphicus,
the god of poetry (III.418-23).43
This 
metaphorical 
mention 
of 
hunger 
framed 
within 
the
autobiographical narrative is turned in Cervantes’s Viaje into a
reference of literary criticism, intertwining once again the different
dimensions in this kaleidoscopic multiperspectivism.
The third dimension to consider in Viaje is the mythological satire.44
Cervantes presents us with a parody of classical mythology in which
the gods become human to the point of being transformed into
caricatures:
Cervantes, the new Lucian, takes pleasure in presenting us with some
gods who have descended from their majestic pedestals, transformed
into common and everyday beings, as well as anachronistic, such that
their attire, customs, and language are those of typical Spaniards of the
period. Cervantes masterfully describes them in the Viaje, just as he
does in his prose works. If Don Quixote converts inns into castles, and
villagers 
into 
princesses, 
here 
Cervantes 
practices 
a 
reverse
metamorphosis: he reduces Olympic deities to human stature,
submitting them to the caricature-like setting that permeates the
atmosphere of this work.45
Rodríguez Marín follows along the same lines as Gaos but adds a
suggestive comparison by equating Cervantes’s gods to those portrayed
by Velázquez in his mythological paintings.46 The Sevillian painter
subverted mythology in his portraits, as cleverly described by José
Ortega y Gasset:
Velázquez is a giant atheist, a colossal heathen. With his brush he
discards the gods as if he were sweeping them away with a broom. In
his Bacchanalia, there is not just one Bacchus, but a multitude
representing Bacchus. He is our painter. He has prepared the way for
our age, exempt of gods; an administrative age in which, instead of
Dionysus, we speak of alcoholism.47
Although Ortega tends towards an existentialist interpretation of these
deities, the objective of Cervantes’s parody goes back to literary
criticism. By subverting and deforming all learned literature inspired by
the mythological world the author denounces the fact that it has
become obsolete within contemporary literary parameters.
To prove his point, Cervantes uses a parodic view of mythology,
where the excrement of Pegasus becomes a precious medicinal
remedy,48 or the Castalian Spring is transformed into a public bath
where the poets can wash their private parts.49 The humorous dialogue
between Venus and Neptune perfectly illustrates these Gods,
particularly Venus, who has lost her magnanimous aura in order to
become a ridiculous character lacking all dignity and decorum. Indeed,
in order to dissuade Neptune from sinking a ship filled with poetasters,
the Goddess uses her feminine wiles in a very crude manner:
Los dioses que se ven, se respetaron,
y haciendo sus zalemas a lo moro,
de verse juntos en extremo holgaron.
Guardáronse real grave decoro,
y procuró Ciprina en aquel punto
mostrar de su belleza el gran tesoro.
Ensanchó el verdugado, y dióle el punto
con ciertos puntapiés, que fueron coces
para el Dios que las vio y quedó difunto.
[The immortals, as they met, to greet were fain,
and making their salaams in Moorish way,
expressed their joy at meeting once again;
With royal gravity their part they play,
and at this point the Cyprian had a mind
the cream of all her beauty to display;
she spread her ample skirts before, behind,
and with her twinkling toes gave kicks outright
at the rapt god, who saw them and grew blind.]50
Márquez Villanueva has read this episode euphemistically, as a
rhetorical technique for transmitting the most transgressive aspects of
the poem:
Under these strained necessities, Cervantes not only finds euphemism to
be a spontaneous ally for the transgression of his poem but also reduces
it to the heritage of a deteriorated cultural apparatus in which it is no
longer possible to believe because it has become empty and the time
has come to directly confront realities, forever abandoning Parnassus.51
For Márquez Villanueva, Cervantes’s gods go beyond Velazquez’s by
anticipating the esperpénticos (grotesque and distorted) heroes of Valle-
Inclán.52 The mythological parody derives in literary criticism, showing
one more time how Viaje spills beyond the three categories examined
here—the social and literary criticism, the autobiography, and the
mythological satire. This multifaceted dimension of the work is also
obvious in the ‘Adjunta al Parnaso’, which functions as an addendum
with which Cervantes concludes his Viaje.
‘Adjunta al Parnaso’: Back in Madrid
‘Adjunta al Parnaso’ is a burlesque epilogue that narrates the
experience of the protagonist back in Madrid. Cervantes meets with
Pancracio de Roncesvalles, a young poet and one of his admirers, who
has been looking for him in order to deliver a letter from Apollo. They
begin a conversation about the nature of poets and, moreover, about
dramatic literature—a dialogue that Cervantes uses to express his
opinion and to speak about his depreciated legacy as a playwright.
Pancracio then delivers the letter from Apollo, in which the god
informs him of what has happened since his departure. This missive
includes a set of rules, entitled ‘Privilegios, ordenanzas y advertencias
que Apolo envía a los poetas españoles’ [‘Privileges, Decrees, and
Warnings, which Apollo Sends to the Spanish Poets’], which the god
has written in order to regularize the situation of poets and poetry in
Spain.
Just as the poem had its literary sources, the ‘Adjunta’ also has its
own antecedents and could function as an independent work, although,
as I have previously mentioned, it is deeply rooted in the same themes
and motives as Viaje. Caporali’s Viaggio di Parnaso is again one of the
main sources, specifically its ‘Appendix’ titled ‘Avvisi di Parnaso’
[‘News from Parnassus’]. Regarding the section ‘Privilegios, ordenanzas
y advertencias’, Rodríguez Marín finds a possible connection with the
first ballad of Part IV of the Romancero general [Universal Ballad-Book]
(1600), which begins with a series of by-laws issued by Apollo.53
Another source that can be noted in the ‘Adjunta’ is the satirical
prose of Quevedo, directly related to the description of the attire of the
young Pancracio. His outfit is a clear referent to the physical
descriptions of some of the characters in El Buscón, which, in addition
to their burlesque essence, border on the fantastic and the absurd, just
as Pancracio’s clothes do in the following quote:
[S]e llegó a mi un mancebo, al parecer de veinte y cuatro años, poco
más o menos, todo limpio, todo aseado y todo crujiendo gorgaranes;
pero con un cuello tan grande y tan almidonado, que creí que para
llevarle fueran menester los hombros de otro Atlante. Hijos deste cuello
eran dos puños chatos que, comenzando de las muñecas subían y
trepaban por las canillas del brazo arriba, que parecía que iban a dar a
asalto a las barbas. No he visto yo yedra tan codiciosa de subir desde el
pie de la muralla donde se arrima hasta las almenas, como el ahínco
que llevaban estos puños a ir a darse de puñaladas con los codos.
Finalmente, la exorbitancia del cuello era tal que en el cuello se
escondía y sepultaba el rostro y los puños los brazos.
[I was accosted by a youth of some four-and-twenty summers, a few
more or less; cleanly withal, and arrayed to the full in garments of
rustling silk, but with a ruff so large, and bestarched, that the shoulders
of an Atlas seemed needful to bear it. To match this ruff were two flat
cuffs, which, beginning with the wrists, went creeping up the brachial
bones, as if eager to assail the whiskers. Never have I seen Ivy more
ambitious of climbing up its supporting Wall to the topmost
battlements, than were these cuffs in their eager desire to come to
fisticuffs with the elbows. In short, the enormity of the ruff and cuffs
was such, that the face lay hid and buried in the ruff, and the arms in
the cuffs.]54
Overall, the ‘Adjunta’ has a happier and less embittered tone than the
rest of the Viaje. Cervantes displays in his prose epilogue a type of
picaresque humour similar to that of his Entremeses, although he does
not hide his frustrations as a playwright. As shown in the dialogue
between Miguel and Pancracio—two alter egos of Cervantes himself—
the author of Viaje seems to have accepted his fate as a failed
playwright and the fact that public theatres in Madrid—and in Spain in
general—were not ready to appreciate his dramatic talent. Nonetheless,
in the ‘Adjunta’, we glimpse an author who is confident of his dramatic
oeuvre and who chooses to publish his comedias so they might be better
appreciated on the page, thus ensuring his dramatic legacy, as he
explains in the following lines: ‘Pero pienso darlas a la estampa para
que se vea de espacio lo que pasa apriesa, y se disimula o no se
entiende, cuando las representan’ [‘I have thoughts, however, of giving
them to the press, that people may see at their leisure what passes
hurriedly, inaccurately, and often unintelligibly when acted on the
stage’].55 In addition to this self-evaluation of his work, Cervantes goes
back to the demystified mythological world and presents Apollo with
headaches and with writer’s block:
No sé si del ruido de la batalla, ó del vapor que arrojó de sí la tierra,
empapada en la sangre de los contrarios, me han dado unos vaguidos de
cabeza, que verdaderamente me tienen como tonto, y no acierto á
escribir cosa que sea de provecho.
[Whether caused by the din of battle or the steaming vapours from the
earth soaked with the blood of the slain, I know not, but I feel certain
swimmings of the head, which hold me as one distraught, unable to
write anything either for pleasure or profit.]56
This image of Apollo goes hand in hand with the portrait of all the
other gods in the poem. There is nothing magnanimous about him; he
is reduced to the most earthly and vulgar level.
In the ‘Privilegios, ordenanzas y advertencias’, a legal satirical
document attached to Apollo’s letter, the son of Zeus attempts to
regulate the masses of poets circulating in Spain. Among the many
clauses included, the idea that the quality of the work is what defines
the good poet stands out many times as one of the main messages
throughout Viaje. By including these regulations, Cervantes finds a new
opportunity to emphasize the precarious state of contemporary poetry
and to criticize the mediocrity of Spanish poets at the time. These ideas
—deeply rooted in literary criticism and repeated time and again—
become the ideological driving force that brings together all the
different dimensions of Viaje studied here.
New Directions
Although, according to Gaos, Viaje was understood better abroad than
in Spain,57 it nonetheless had an impact within the national literary
circles at the time and in subsequent generations, as witnessed by the
rise of works that were inspired by it and leaving behind it a prolific
legacy in Spanish literary history. Lokos has traced a detailed catalogue
of works extending into the nineteenth century that shared obvious
characteristics with Viaje. A derivative work of Viaje during the
seventeenth century was Coronas del Parnaso y Platos de las Musas [The
Daily Fare of the Salon Muses] (1635) by Alonso Gerónimo de Salas
Barbadillo. In this case, it is a miscellaneous piece that comments on
contemporary literature and the different agents that play a part in it.
Another work mentioned by Lokos is El Vejamen [Poetic Satire] (1640)
by Jerónimo de Cáncer y Velasco, a parodic discourse in which its
author mocks the most illustrious poets of its time.
Turning to the eighteenth century, Lección poética. Sátira contra los
vicios introducidas in la poesía castellana [Poetic and Satirical Lesson
against the Vices Introduced in Castilian Poetry] (1782) and La derrota de
los pedantes [The Defeat of the Pedants] (1789), both by Leandro
Fernández de Moratín, closely follow the allegorical motif of the
literary battle and the protest against bad poetry, respectively. From
the nineteenth century, Exequias de la lengua castellana [Exequies of the
Castilian Language] (1871) by Juan Pablo Forner and Apolo en Pafos
[Apollo in Paphos] (1887) by Leopoldo Alas ‘Clarín’ share with Viaje the
satirical tone and the attack against mediocre poets.58
Although it is important to emphasize the legacy of Cervantes’s Viaje
throughout the centuries, it is also of interest to take into account the
way in which this work relates to the rest of the author’s oeuvre. Gaos,
for example, has described Viaje as a ‘small Quixote in verse’.59 In
addition to its parodic texture—which is undoubtedly the most obvious
connection with Cervantes’s masterpiece60—critics have found other
parallels on narrative and thematic levels. Lokos, for example, has
identified irony, humour, and suspense at the conclusion of Chapters
One, Three, and Four of Viaje, as well as the mixing of different genres
in both works.61 For Gaos, the similarity lays mainly in the message
shared by Viaje and Don Quixote, that is:
to clearly demonstrate the way man tends to judge himself above his
own merits, the way in which he bears his chimerical concept of
himself, and the degree to which his aspirations, desires, and dreams go
beyond the real possibilities of actually satisfying them.62
Another connection with Cervantes’s novel involves the similarities
between some of the motifs developed in specific episodes of Don
Quixote, such as the dream-journey experienced by the protagonist in
the Cave of Montesinos, or the imaginary voyage with Clavileño.63
Along these interpretive lines, Lokos adds a suggestive parallelism
between the characterization of Lady Poetry and Dulcinea: ‘The figure
of true Poetry is the Dulcinea of the Viaje and Cervantes-protagonist is
the knight that will try to save her. In the poem, Poetry is portrayed as
an affronted, injured maiden in need of protection’.64 In addition, the
embittered tone with which the two protagonists conclude their
journey is also a significant coincidence that reflects a return to reality
without really having achieved their respective ideals.65 This ultimate
personal disappointment is also found in one of the Novelas ejemplares,
El licenciado vidriera. In addition to the frustration experienced by
Tomás Rodaja and the protagonist of Viaje—who end up relegated to
the status of misunderstood beings—their voices function as a way to
enunciate a wide range of social critique.66
In sum, to venture into Viaje del Parnaso as a reader is to be led by
the hand of Cervantes into his experience as a man of letters in early
modern Spain. Viaje is therefore a testimony of senescence in which our
author—‘cisne en las canas, y en la voz un ronco’ [‘with snowy hairs of
swan, with voice of hoarse’]67—evaluates in retrospect his life’s work,
defines the foundations of what true poetry is, and by extension,
identifies the essence of good literature according to his own personal
standards. Although it has its moments of satire, it is also a profoundly
intimate and personal oeuvre. Cervantes captains a journey in order to
revisit his own career as a writer and confess his personal aspirations
and his artistic frustrations in a society where he felt misunderstood
intellectually. In this sense, Viaje is also a testimony of the social and
literary life of the period, the world of the academies, the gossip mills,
patronage, and the competition among artists striving to survive from
their art. As much as he tried to escape this provincial Madrid, he is
doomed to go back to his house, exhausted from his unrecognized
artistic journey as he points out in the last verses of his Viaje:
Fuíme con esto, y, lleno de despecho,
busqué mi antigua y lóbrega posada,
y arrójeme molido sobre el lecho;
que cansa, cuando es larga una jornada.
[On this, with smothered ire, I turned and fled,
and to my old and sombre home retired,
and flung me worn and shattered on my bed;
for when a journey’s long one feels so tired.]68
Works Cited
Bouterwek, Frederick. Geschichte der Poesie und Beredsamkeit seit dem Ende des
13. Jahrhunderts (Göttingen: J. F. Röwer, 1804).
Canavaggio Jean. ‘La dimensión autobiográfica del Viaje del Parnaso’. Cervantes:
Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 1, no. 1–2 (1981): pp. 29–41.
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Don Quixote, translated by Edith Grossman
(New York: Harpers Collins Publishers, 2005).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Exemplary Stories, translated by Lesley Lipson
(Oxford: Oxford UP, 1998).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Journey to Parnassus, translated by James Y.
Gibson (London: Kegan Paul, Trench and Co., 1883).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Novelas ejemplares, edited by Jorge García López
(Barcelona: Crítica, 2001).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Viaje del Parnaso. Poesías completas, I, edited by
Vicente Gaos (Madrid: Castalia, 1984).
Correa, Gustavo. ‘La dimensión mitológica del Viaje del Parnaso de Cervantes’.
Comparative Literature 12, no. 2 (1960): pp. 113–24.
Guardia, José M. Le Voyage au Parnasse (Paris: J. Gay, 1864).
Gaos, Vicente. ‘Introducción’. In Viaje del Parnaso. Poesías completas, I, edited by
Gaos (Madrid: Castalia, 1984).
Gibson, James Y. ‘Preface’. In Journey to Parnassus, translated by James Y.
Gibson (London: Kegan Paul, Trench and Co., 1883), pp. ix–lxxv.
Green, Otis H. The Literary Mind of Medieval and Renaissance Spain (Lexington:
The University of Kentucky P, 1970).
Lokos, Ellen D. ‘El lenguaje emblemático en el Viaje del Parnaso’. Cervantes:
Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 9, no. 1 (1989): pp. 63–74.
Lokos, Ellen D. Models, Genres, and meanings of Cervantes’s Viaje del Parnaso,
Diss, Harvard University, 1988 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 1988).
Lokos, Ellen D. The Solitary Journey. Cervantes’s Voyage to Parnassus (New York:
Peter Lang, 1991).
Márquez Villanueva, Francisco. ‘Eufemismos del Viaje del Parnaso’. Bulletin of
Hispanic Studies 82, no. 5 (2005): pp. 683–700.
Maurino, Ferdinando D. ‘El Viaje de Cervantes y la Comedia de Dante’. Kentucky
Foreign Language Quaterly 3 (1956): pp. 7–12.
Ortega y Gasset, José. El espectador (Madrid: Biblioteca nueva, 1950).
Quevedo, Francisco de. El buscón, edited by Domingo Ynduráin (Madrid:
Cátedra, 1982).
Quevedo, Francisco de. The Swindler, translated by Michael Alpert. In Lazarillo
de Tormes and The Swindler: Two Spanish Picaresque Novels (London: Penguin,
2003), pp. 61–197.
Rivers, Elias L. ‘¿Cómo leer el Viaje del Parnaso?’. In Actas del Tercer Coloquio
Internacional de la Asociación de Cervantistas; Alcalá de Henares 12–16 nov.
1990 (Barcelona/Madrid: Anthropos, 1990), pp. 105–16.
Rivers, Elias L. ‘Genres and Voices in the Viaje del Parnaso’. In On Cervantes:
Essays for L. A. Murillo, edited by James Q. Parr (Newark: Juan de la Cuesta,
1991), pp. 207–25.
Rivers, Elias L. ‘Viaje del Parnaso: Una posible introducción’. In Actas del Segundo
Coloquio Internacional de la Asociación de Cervantistas. Alcalá de Henares 6–9
nov. 1989 (Barcelona: Anthropos, 1991), pp. 727–30.
Rodríguez Marín, Francisco. ‘Discurso preliminar’. In Viaje del Parnaso by
Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra, edited by Rodríguez Marín (Madrid: Bermejo,
1935), pp. ix-lvvviii.
Ruiz Pérez, Pedro. ‘Contexto crítico de la poesía cervantina’. Bulletin of the
Cervantes Society of America 17, no. 1 (1997): pp. 62–86.
Schevill, Rodolfo and Adolfo Bonilla. ‘Introducción’. In Viage del Parnaso by
Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra, edited by Schevill and Bonilla (Madrid:
Gráficas Reunidas, 1922), pp. v–xii.
Stagg, Geoffrey. ‘Propaganda and Poetics on Parnassus: Cervantes’s Viaje del
Parnaso’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 8, no. 1 (1988):
pp. 23–38.
Taléns, Jenaro. ‘Poetry as Autobiography: Theory and Poetic Practice in
Cervantes’. In Autobiography in Early Modern Spain, edited by Nicholas
Spadaccini and Jenaro Taléns (Minneapolis: The Prisma Institute, 1988), pp.
215–47.
1 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, pp. 16–17.
2 Cervantes, Exemplary Stories, p. 3.
3 Lokos, Models…, p. 6.
4 Correa, ‘La dimensión…’, p. 113.
5 Cervantes, Viaje…, I.25-7.
6 Cervantes, Journey…, p. 11.
7 Lokos, Models…, p. 2.
8 Rivers, ‘¿Cómo…?’, p. 106.
9 Correa, p. 114.
10 Lokos, Models…, pp. 22–8.
11 Rivers also includes Erasmus’s In Praise of Folly (1511) as an extension of
the tradition of Ἀποκολοκύντωσις (Apocolocyntosis) by Seneca and Lucian’s
Dialogues (¿‘Como…’, p. 114).
12 Lokos, Models…, p. 20.
13 It is also important to acknowledge epic poetry as one of the primary
sources for Viaje; nevertheless, as with other genres, Cervantes uses it in order
to subvert it. Indeed, the influence of epic poetry is notable not only in the
battle between good poets and poetasters, but in the invocation of the Muse of
War, the motive of the journey itself, the description of the storm, and the
catalogue of poets (Ruiz Pérez, p. 68).
14 Cervantes, Viaje, I.1-9; Journey…, p. 9.
15 Gaos, p. 33.
16 Rivers, ‘Genres…’, p. 209.
17 Lokos, Models…, p. 12.
18 Lokos, Models…, p. 31, 37.
19 Lokos, Models…, p. 19.
20 Maurino, p. 7.
21 Maurino, pp. 7–8.
22 Rivers, ‘Genres…’, p. 209.
23 In addition to Viaje de Sannio, Cueva wrote two other ballads—‘Como los
Poetas siguieron a la Poesía, y lo que le pasó con ellos…’ [‘How the Poets
pursued Poetry and what became of them…’],‘Como los poetas conquistaron el
Parnaso, lo ganaron y Apolo y las musas huyeron dél’ [‘How the Poets
Conquered Parnassus, Occupied it and Apollo and the Muses Fled’]—as part of
El Coro Febeo de Romances historiales [Phoebean Choir of Historical Ballads]
(1587)—which may have inspired the way Cervantes crafted in the concept of
poetic mediocrity and the literary battle in his Viaje (Gaos, p. 34).
24 Rodríguez Marín, p. lxx.
25 Rodríguez Marín, p. lxx.
26 Stagg, pp. 30–1.
27 Lokos, Models…, p. 72.
28 Cervantes, Viaje, IV.160-80; Journey…, p. 117.
29 A similar description of what true poetry meant for Cervantes can be
found in Don Quixote II.16. In a conversation with Diego de Miranda, the Knight
compares true poetry to an ‘innocent young maiden’: ‘Poetry, Señor, in my
opinion, is like an innocent young maiden who is extremely beautiful, and
whom many other maidens, who are the other fields of knowledge, are careful
to enrich, polish, and adorn, and she must be served by all of them, and all of
them must encourage her, but this maiden does not wished to be pawed or
dragged to the streets or proclaimed at the corners of the squares or in the
corners of palaces. Her alchemy is such that the person who knows how to treat
her will turn her into purest gold of inestimable value; the man who has her
must keep her within bounds and not allow her to turn to indecent satires or
cruel sonnets; she should never be in the marketplace except in heroic poems,
heartfelt tragedies, or joyful, witty comedies; she should not be allowed in the
company of scoundrels or the ignorant mob incapable of knowing or
appreciating the treasures that lie within her. And do not think, Señor, that
when I say mob I mean only humble, plebeian people; for anyone who is
ignorant, even a lord and prince, can and should be counted as one of the mob.
And so the man who uses and treats poetry in the requisite ways that I have
mentioned will be famous, and his name esteemed, in all the civilized nations of
the world’ (p. 556).
30 Lokos, Models…, p. 51; on the topic of academies, I refer to the third
chapter in Lokos’s monograph, The Solitary Journey (pp. 101–29).
31 Cervantes was part of the Parnassus Academy. In the inaugural address at
this academy, one of the images described was of an army of poet-soldiers
whose main objective was to confront ignorance (Lokos, Models…, p. 136).
32 Rivers, ‘Viaje…’, p. 727.
33 However, there is no doubt that Cervantes was sincere in his praise for
some of the poets mentioned in that list such as Quevedo, whose aesthetic
influence is clearly felt and honoured in Viaje.
34 Gaos, p. 35; all translations of secondary sources are mine unless indicated
otherwise.
35 For Gaos, exposing the poem to interpretation beyond mere social
criticism is what has kept this work vibrant throughout the twentieth century:
‘If the Viaje were merely a critical and didactic poem, despite its
characterization of the poets and observations on poetic art, which are both
personal and astute, it would still be far from a great work, poetically speaking.
At most, today it would be considered a documentary piece of archaeological
interest’ (p. 28).
36 It is worth mentioning that in Don Quixote I.48 Cervantes refers to three
tragedies by Lupercio de Argensola—Isabela, Filis, and Alejandra—as exemplary
plays worthy of admiration. Maybe after the incident with Lemos he might not
have complimented Argensola’s works with such enthusiasm.
37 Cervantes was conversant with emblematic language and was no doubt
familiar with Andrea Alciato’s Emblematum liber [Book of Emblems] (1531) and
Los emblemas morales [The Moral Emblems] (1610) by Sebastián Covarrubias
(Lokos, ‘El lenguaje…’, p. 64).
38 Cervantes, Viaje, II.388-90; Journey…, p. 63.
39 Lokos, ‘El Lenguaje…’, p. 69.
40 Quoted in Canavaggio, p. 31.
41 pp. 31–2. In Vasco’s production this multidimensional presence was
masterfully achieved at a symbolic level by using a puppet representing
Cervantes manipulated by five actors who share the task of the puppeteer to
provide a polyphonic aura to the wooden protagonist.
42 Canavaggio, p. 34.
43 Rivers, ‘¿Cómo…’, p. 114.
44 Correa is one of the critics who has focused on the mythological aspects of
the Viaje from three different perspectives: (1) the allegorical, (2) the
metaphorical, and (3) the symbolic.
45 Gaos, p. 33.
46 Rodríguez Marín, p. lxv.
47 Ortega y Gasset, pp. 74–5. Gaos includes this quotation in his critical
introduction to the Viaje, which I consider necessary to include in this study
since it perfectly captures the essence of Velazquez’s gods and by association,
Cervantes’s ridiculous deities.
48 ‘Uno sus excrementos recogía / en dos de cuero grandes barjuletas. /
Pregunté para qué lo tal hacía. / Respondióme Cilenio a lo bellaco, /con no sé
qué vislumbres de ironía: / —Esto que se recoge es el tabaco, /que a los
váguidos sirve de cabeza de algún poeta de celebro flaco’ [‘For some, in two big
bags of leather dry,/collect his droppings with the utmost care!/what are they
doing?, I enquired, and why?/Mercury answered me right brusque enough,/and
yet with humorous gleamings in his eye:/that which they gather is Tobacco
snuff,/which for a poet with a weakly brain,/to cure its giddiness, is rare good
stuff!] (VIII.161-8; p. 239).
49 ‘unos no solamente se hartaron, / sino que pies y manos y otras cosas /
algo más indecentes se lavaron’ [‘Some, not content their thirsty mouths to fill,
/ made eager haste to bathe their hands and feet, / and sundry matters more
uncomely still’] (III.370-2; p. 97).
50 Cervantes, Viaje, V.115-23; Journey…, p. 157.
51 Márquez Villanueva, p. 697.
52 Márquez Villanueva, p. 697.
53 Rodríguez Marín, pp. lxxiv–xv. These fictional by-laws were a very
popular subgenre throughout the seventeenth century, as proven by many
works that include them, such as Luis Vélez de Guevara’s El Diablo Cojuelo [The
Devil upon Two Sticks] (1641), Jacinto Polo de Medina’s Academias del jardín
[The Garden Academies] (1630), and Manuel de León Marchante’s La justa
poética con que la Universidad de Alcalá celebró el nacimiento del Príncipe Próspero
[The Poetic Contest with which the University of Alcalá celebrated the Birth of Prince
Próspero] (1660) (p. lxxv).
54 Cervantes, Viaje p. 179; Journey…, p. 265, 267.
55 Cervantes, Viaje, p. 183; Journey…, p. 227.
56 Cervantes, Viaje, p. 186; Journey…, p. 285.
57 Gaos, p. 36.
58 Lokos mentions all these derivatives on pp. 205–6 of her study, Models,
Genres, and Meanings of Cervantes’ Viaje del Parnaso and goes on to mention non-
Spanish works that also share characteristics with Cervantes’s Viaje, such as Les
Satires [Satires] (1657) and the heroic-comedy poem entitled, Le lutrin [The
Lectern] (1674) by Nicolas Boileau-Despréaux; and Battle of the Books (1704)
and Epistle to Dr Arbuthnot (1734) by Jonathan Swift and Alexander Pope,
respectively.
59 Gaos, p. 32.
60 Cervantes’s novel mocks chivalry books whereas Viaje parodies classical
mythology (Talens, p. 236).
61 Lokos, The Solitary…, p. 180.
62 Gaos, p. 32.
63 Ruiz Pérez p. 68.
64 Lokos, The Solitary…, p. 180.
65 Lokos, The Solitary…, pp. 182–3.
66 Green, p. 186; Lokos, The Solitary…, p. 177.
67 Cervantes, Viaje, I.105; Journey…, p. 17.
68 Cervantes, Viaje, VIII.454-7; Journey…, p. 261.
Chapter 22
Attributions and Lost and Promised
Works
Aaron M. Kahn
University of Sussex
When studying an author of the stature of Miguel de Cervantes, we
relish the corpus of works that he created in his lifetime with which we
are familiar. The Cervantine canon develops a variety of themes,
including captivity and enclosure, warfare and empire, social and
literary marginalization, the state of arts and letters in Spain, the
Church and the great thinkers of his day (and the past), love and
marriage, and perhaps most intriguingly, madness and the depths of the
human psyche. An artist of verse, drama, and prose, Cervantes
intentionally blurred structural conventions and in some cases wrote in
a manner that is considered unique to him. So, when we venture into
the realm of what he possibly wrote that has either not survived to the
twenty-first century, or that could be floating around anonymously or
with someone else’s name, it piques the interest of scholarship, and at
times reveals some veritable literary treasures.
A study of this kind is by its very nature speculative in part,
especially when considering the plotlines of lost works, but when we
are presented with hard evidence, as in the case of some attribution
studies, we can rely on a more scientific method to provide
conclusions; however, without definitive proof of authorship, doubt
will always linger in some minds. This chapter, therefore, instead of
presenting new evidence, is intended as a review of works that have
been attributed to Cervantes, works that he mentions and that are lost,
and works that he promised us: works that he announced as
forthcoming, but that he likely was unable to complete before his death
in 1616. This chapter will first discuss theatrical writing—Cervantes’s
earliest passion—including entremeses. I will then explore the attributed
dialogue identified as Las semanas del jardín, and end with works in
prose. Because of space constraints, I will not refer to all the attributed
interludes and poems; I have also left out Topographia e Historia de
Argel, as only one scholar has ever attributed this to Cervantes without
much support from academia. Finally, I will not refer to Avellaneda’s
apocryphal Don Quixote, Part II, which is the subject of Chapter 7 of
this volume.
As scholarship of authorial attribution resides mainly in the
theoretical, an educated guess often represents the only option at our
disposal. As there is no universal theory of authorial attribution, we
must often take a different, and at times unique, approach for each
work considered. According to José Luis Madrigal, the surest way to
establish authorship is to identify a specific writer’s idiolect:
Idiolect…is not style. One of the problems with the majority of
attribution studies is the systematic confusion between style and
idiolect. Style is the combination of any writer’s morphological and
syntactic traits, whereas idiolect is the linguistic repertoire of a speaker.
Idiolect, then, can be composed of various styles and dialects, although
normally within a speaker’s linguistic repertoire there always exists a
certain homogeneity…Any style is susceptible to being imitated, but
never the idiolect.1
Regarding Cervantes, there have been a handful of academic studies
that cover multiple works attributed to him,2 along with various studies
focusing on individual pieces. This chapter attempts to cover the most
significant of these, but in no way should be considered exhaustive.
The principal methods employed include the following: textual
comparisons between the works studied and known Cervantine works,
comparison of style, the study of themes and characters portrayed that
resemble Cervantes’s, and more modern technological tools, such as the
CORDE, the Corpus diacrónico del español, which provides linguistic
information about works and authors; this is a way to tell us which
phrases were used by which writer, when, and in which work. And yet
some scholars rely on instinct, which, while not offering much
convincing empirical evidence, provides us with a point of departure
for more academically focused research.
Theatre
Upon his return from captivity in Algiers, Cervantes attempted to forge
a career as a dramatist, but famously, the rise of Lope de Vega and the
comedia nueva and Cervantes’s refusal to conform thwarted him. What
exactly he wrote in the first stage of his dramatic writing, the 1580s
and perhaps early 1590s, remains unclear. Cervantes rather vaguely
refers to the twenty or thirty plays that he wrote during this early
period in the prologue to his Ocho comedias, y ocho entremese nuevos,
nunca representados of 1615, but here mentions only three titles: La
destruyción de Numancia, Los tratos de Argel, and La batalla, the third of
which is now lost. A year earlier, with the publication of Viaje del
Parnaso, Cervantes includes in his postscript ‘Adjunta al Parnaso’ the
titles of these three and several more. When asked by his interlocutor,
Pancracio, if he has ever written comedies, Cervantes provides the titles
in his response:
–Sí –dije yo–, muchas; y, a no ser mías, me parecieran dignas de
alabanza, como lo fueron Los tratos de Argel, La Numancia, La gran
turquesca, La batalla naval, La Jerusalem, La Amaranta o la del mayo, El
bosque amoroso, La única, y La bizarra Arsinda, y otras muchas de que no
me acuerdo. Mas la que yo más estimo y de la que más me precio fue y
es de una llamada La confusa, la cual, con paz sea dicho de cuantas
comedias de capa y espada hasta hoy se han representado, bien puede
tener lugar señalado por buena entre las mejores.3
[‘Yes’, I said, ‘many; and even if they were not mine they would appear
worthy of praise, called The Traffic of Algiers, Numantia, The Great
Turkish Lady, The Naval Battle, Jerusalem, Amaranth, or the Lady of May,
The Forest of Love, The Only, and The Gallant Arsinda, and many others
that I do not remember. But the one that I esteem most and the one that
made me the most money was one called The Mix-Up, which, I can truly
say would be considered very good even among all the cloak and
dagger plays that have been produced until now.’]
There is conjecture that some of these plays from the 1580s appear in
reworked versions in the 1615 publication—a notion addressed below
—and hence are not lost. There is little evidence for this, however, and
Cervantes certainly makes no mention of having done this. One would
suppose that as Cervantes wrote the list above about a year prior to the
publication of Ocho comedias that he might have clarified this, but this
is not necessarily the case and cannot be used as proof for or against
this idea.4
It is from this list where we begin considering Cervantes’s output
from this time. Perhaps surprisingly, I will begin by addressing two
plays that are widely studied and whose authorship has never been in
dispute: La Numancia and Los tratos de Argel. Dated to the early 1580s
upon Cervantes’s return from captivity, they serve as a representation
of his style during this first period of his career as a writer. All
indications are that Cervantes first and foremost wanted to make his
living writing for the stage, and these two plays exemplify his pre-
Lopean, pre-comedia nueva attempts to contribute to the formation of a
Spanish national theatre. It was a time of transition on the Spanish
stage, and while the comedia nueva would ultimately triumph, these
two works provide us with some Cervantine fingerprints in terms of
content, theme, and creation of characters.
Both Numancia and Tratos first appeared in print in 1784,
presumably meaning that only those with access to the manuscripts—
two of which survive for each play though none in Cervantes’s hand—
or those who saw them performed in the 1580s had any knowledge of
their existence beyond Cervantes’s own references to them. In fact, the
actor’s sheet for the role of Ocasión in Tratos housed in the Biblioteca
Nacional de España (BNE) in Madrid is the only proof, other than the
author’s word, that any of his plays from this period were performed at
all.5 I begin with these two plays because of the four manuscripts, only
the manuscript for Tratos in the BNE carries Cervantes’s name as the
author, and even then it contains a factual error about him stating that
he was held captive in Algiers for seven years instead of the accurate
number of five. The others carry no name of their creator, so they were
only identified as having been written by Cervantes because of his own
reference to them. Perhaps if they had been discovered today they
would have undergone much more scrutiny than in the late eighteenth
century.
Although these are the only two extant plays from this era accepted
into the canon, they offer us with an insight into Cervantes’s purpose of
composing theatrical pieces. Placed in the context of Spanish drama
from the 1570s and 1580s, these two plays have been studied as being
negatively critical of Spanish imperial expansion, most notably Philip
II’s decision to invade Portugal and assume that country’s throne
instead of concentrating military resources on the Muslim enemy across
the Mediterranean and the plight of thousands of Christian slaves.
Watson’s 1971 book Juan de la Cueva and the Portuguese Succession
analyses Cueva’s plays from this same perspective of insisting that
Philip had abandoned the fight against Islam. Furthermore, ‘the links
between Spain and Portugal were so strong and the blood-ties between
their royal families and their nobility were so close that any attack on
Portugal by Spain would be akin to civil war’.6 Within this context, and
in the context of other dramatists of the day, including Andrés Rey de
Artieda, Lupercio Leonardo de Argensola, Jerónimo Bermúdez, and
Gabriel Lobo Lasso de la Vega, we can make an educated assumption
that Cervantes wrote other plays with the objective of portraying on
stage a call to action with the aim of galvanizing support for a renewed
attack on Northern Africa.7
Included in the works of these playwrights are various themes that
appear to have been developed to censure Spanish imperial policies.
The danger of Philip II’s rule descending into tyranny, and the effects of
the monarch’s sins on the people presented a very real fear to the
populace. The influence of ambitious courtiers and grandees tainted the
divine authority of the king, which made for a popular literary and
dramatic motif in Golden Age Spain. Finally, the fight against Islam had
stalled, despite a series of successes in the 1570s, such as victories in
the Battle of Lepanto (1571) and the recapture of Tunis (1573), both
led by Don Juan de Austria. Glorifying these battles in the 1580s
emphasized further that Spain was not able to secure the
Mediterranean for Christendom in the 1570s. Tunis was lost again the
year following its conquest, King Sebastian I of Portugal was killed in
his disastrous attempt to invade modern-day Morocco in 1578, and in
October of 1580, Philip II and the Ottoman Empire signed a peace
accord effectively abandoning the Mediterranean, but without having
secured the liberation of those Christians still held in bondage.8
This information on Numancia and Tratos is pertinent because of the
late Stefano Arata’s discovery of the manuscript of La conquista de
Jerusalén, por Godofre de Bullón. Found in the late 1980s and included
in his catalogue of unpublished manuscripts in the Library of the Royal
Palace in Madrid (1989), Arata published a transcription of the play in
1992, along with an article in which he attributed the play to
Cervantes. Citing various points of analysis, Arata put forth a strong
case, and he followed up his study with an article in 1997 in which he
refers to actors’ sheets from the play.9
The main points of study in support of a Cervantine attribution have
been that: 1) Cervantes refers to a play of his entitled La Jerusalém; 2)
the style and structure of the play belongs to the mid-1580s when
Cervantes was writing for the stage. Arata posited that the three-act
play was originally written in four acts, Acts Three and Four having
been combined into one after the rise in popularity of the comedia
nueva. This notion was confirmed by one of the actors’ sheets of this
play, which specifies lines delivered in the fourth act and which
contains the date of performance as Corpus Christi 1586; 3) an analysis
of the verses and theatrical techniques employed reveal a precise
resemblance to Numancia and Tratos; 4) interpreted within the dialogue
and plot are negatively critical allusions to Philip II’s policy of
abandoning the Mediterranean and forsaking enslaved Christians in
northern Africa.
In 2010, I wrote an article in which I developed a tailor-made theory
of authorial attribution for this play. In it I set out the case for
Cervantes, studying the play’s ideological statements in comparison
with the other playwrights of the 1570s and 80s, comparing words and
phrases that appear in this play and other Cervantine works,
particularly La Numancia and Los tratos de Argel, comparing the
characterizations of Godofre de Bullón10 with Cervantes’s Cipión in La
Numancia, analyzing the stage directions and versification of the play,
and the use of allegorical characters in this play. These allegorical
characters serve the purpose of narration, as they do in La Numancia
and as an exteriorization of the thoughts, feelings, and emotions of the
other characters, as Ocasión and Necesidad do in Los tratos de Argel.
How these characters are depicted is considered to be unique to
Cervantes, and finding exact parallels in a La conquista de Jerusalén
provides perhaps the strongest evidence. By also considering other
possible candidates and the case against Cervantes, I concluded that
Cervantes is the likeliest author of this play, but without concrete proof
it will always be difficult to make the assertion definitively.
Other studies have almost universally accepted the likelihood that
Cervantes wrote this play. Hector Brioso Santos’s studies of 2007, 2009,
and 2010 have provided a great deal of support for the attribution,
including his edition of the play published by Cátedra in 2009, and
José Montero Reguera has referred to it on various occasions,
strengthening the argument, most notably by studying the similarity of
verse forms between the anonymous play and those of Cervantes.
Alfredo Baras Escolá and Alfredo Rodríguez López-Vázquez both
contribute to the attribution, the latter relying on using the CORDE to
demonstrate semantic similarities, but while this can be useful, I have
expressed concerns with relying on this method.11 As so little of what
Cervantes and other playwrights wrote from this period survives,
demonstrating linguistic similarities and differences does not rule
Cervantes out as the author, but it also is far from definitive in ruling
out others as well. Moisés R. Castillo goes beyond the attribution of the
play to Cervantes and analyses ‘a series of thematic, dramatic, and
ideological aspects that connect La conquista de Jerusalén with
Cervantes’s other plays about captivity El trato de Argel, La gran sultana,
y Los baños de Argel’.12 Most recently, Juan Cerezo Soler’s two articles
in 2013 and 2014 have studied, respectively, literary similarities
between La conquista de Jerusalén and the Cervantine corpus and the
notion of the collective whole of Numancia and Jerusalem. The
combined evidence compiled since Arata’s 1992 publication strongly
supports the Cervantine attribution of this play, and maybe academia
should begin including it in the canon.
Continuing with the works for the stage, we return to Cervantes’s
own list. He twice mentions his lost play, La batalla naval: once in
‘Adjunta al Parnaso’ and once in the prologue of Ocho comedias. The
play seems important enough for Cervantes to have referred to it on
two occasions, and we can safely presume that its content depicts the
famed Battle of Lepanto of 1571 in which Cervantes fought and
received life-altering injuries. With both references coming in
conjunction with La Numancia and Los tratos de Argel, and with the
attribution of La conquista de Jerusalén, the plotline of Christian/Muslim
interaction would fit thematically, perhaps with Don Juan de Austria as
the play’s hero. If Cervantes included any autobiographical information
in the play, which seems plausible, he might have introduced a pseudo-
Cervantes, much as he does with Sayavedra en Los tratos de Argel and
La historia del cautivo interpolated in Don Quixote, Part I. Cervantes
certainly admired greatly his commander at Lepanto. In both Los tratos
de Argel and Los baños de Argel the audience senses the despair felt by
the captives when they hear of Don Juan’s untimely death at the age of
thirty-one in 1578, while Cervantes was still in captivity. The
frustration at the lack of action by Philip II, had directed captives’
hopes of liberation towards Don Juan, but his sudden demise simply
added to their despair.
If we follow the interpretation of La Numancia, Los tratos de Argel,
and La conquista de Jerusalén as providing critical social and political
commentary, particularly as a means of renewing the fight against
Islam in the wake of the Portuguese succession, then what better
historical event to commemorate and call Spaniards to arms than
Lepanto? The great battle is notably missing from the speech delivered
by the River Duero at the end of Act I of La Numancia when he
prognosticates Spain’s glorious future as an imperial power, perhaps
emphasizing the importance of the event through its absence; no
conflict with Islam appears in this speech. Another interpretation of
omitting Lepanto is that it serves once again to demonstrate Cervantes’s
exasperation with the state of affairs in the Mediterranean: ‘in fact, the
Battle of Lepanto never did establish any lasting superiority for
Christianity in the Mediterranean, nor did it secure its waters for the
Spanish kingdoms. The lack of references to Lepanto or any other
victory over Muslim powers [in La Numancia] reinforces the notion
that…Spain had not yet reached the zenith of her imperium under her
king’.13 Nor would she reach the height for which many had hoped,
thus leaving thousands of Christians in bondage. La batalla naval
possibly glorified Lepanto to the point of reminding the audience of
how Christian dominance in the Mediterranean was certainly
attainable, but how it was lost and never to be regained with the same
force.
At this same time, in his agreement with theatre owner Gaspar de
Porres dated 3 May 1585, one of the plays that Cervantes agrees to sell
is entitled El trato de Constantinola y muerte de Selim. Along the same
lines as his other plays depicting Muslim-controlled territories, this play
possibly demonstrated once again the need to raise arms against Islam
and warning against the dangers of sin. It could have depicted events in
the reign of the Ottoman Sultan Selim II (1566–74), a man well known
for his degenerate lifestyle, particularly in comparison to his
predecessor and father, Suleiman the Magnificent (1527–66). Selim’s
reign represents the starting point of Ottoman imperial decay. He is
known for never having gone into battle and concentrating more on
obtaining his favourite wine and participating in orgies than on
expanding his influence in the region. The Battle of Lepanto occurred
during his reign, and perhaps portraying this decadence on stage was
another call to try to retake a Constantinople that was morally
weakened by the sin of its sultan.
In 
the 
sixteenth 
and 
seventeenth 
centuries, 
the 
city 
of
Constantinople symbolized loss as a result of sin of the people, and
more importantly, a sinful monarch. In the same decade that Cervantes
wrote this play, Gabriel Lobo Lasso de la Vega’s Tragedia de la
destruyción 
de 
Constantinopla 
[Tragedy 
of 
the 
Destruction 
of
Constantinople] (1587) appeared in print. Scholars have already noted
potential connections between these two writers;14 what is of more
interest here is the content of Lobo’s play, which has been interpreted
as critical of Spanish ambivalence towards and royal indecision about
Islam. The sentiment conveyed is that Constantinople fell in 1453 as a
result of Christian decadence and sin, and blame is placed at the feet of
the last Byzantine emperor, Constantine IX.15 According to Covarrubias,
the city of Constantinople is defined as ‘ciudad nobilissima…cabeça del
Imperio Oriental, en otro tiempo, y agora lo es del Imperio injusto del
gran Turco, por pecados nuestros’ [the most noble of cities…head of the
Eastern Empire in times gone by, and now it is the seat of the Unjust
Empire of the Great Turk, because of our sins].16 Even though Spain
was not involved in the fall of Constantinople, the concept of the
‘nation of Christianity’ sharing blame, or at least in part placing blame
on Christians rather than any Turkish moral superiority, strengthens
the warning of the potential divine consequences of not observing and
rectifying sin.
Forming pacts between Christian and Muslim nations was deemed
sinful by the pope, but it did not stop Philip II from doing so, most
notably the alleged secret peace accord that the Prudent King signed
with the ruler of Fez. The Habsburg Emperor Maximilian II (1564–76)
concluded the Treaty of Adrianople with Selim II in 1568, although the
negotiations took place in Constantinople. Could this be the trato to
which the title refers? Selim II died of a fever after slipping in the
bathtub, so not necessarily the stuff of drama, but if his death had been
depicted as the result of sinful behaviour, then a playwright could have
made it more dramatic.
Staying in Turkey, we come to La gran turquesca, which could also
have been reworked as La gran sultana and published in the 1615
collection. The latter is ‘a play which appears uncomplicated on the
surface, but functions as a kind of kaleidoscope of multifaceted, shifting
perspectives…Cervantes provides ample room for the exploration of
“otherness” and its manifestations’.17 There is the possibility then that
La gran turquesca likewise depicted an Ottoman society with a degree of
tolerance, perhaps as a reference to what Spain could be, or it could
simply have unmasked the fault lines in Spain’s own imperial policies.
According to Schevill and Bonilla, ‘it seems logical, then, to think that
Cervantes wrote or modified La gran sultana after the year 1600, or
even some years later, towards 1607–8 (a date that coincides with the
probable era of the sultana, in the era of her marriage, which Cervantes
makes contemporaneous to the comedy), giving it first the title La gran
turquesca, and revising it for the purposes of the 1615 publication. It is
not unlike Cervantes to use the same argument two times, no is there
reason to think that the two comedies of such similar title differed
much from each other’.18 However, there are some gaps in this logic, as
there is simply no way of knowing that the two titles head the same
play. Perhaps the great Turkish woman is a mujer varonil, in the same
mode as Clorinda in La conquista de Jerusalén, a Muslim woman who
engages in battle.
As mentioned above, the possibility exists that La casa de los celos y
selvas de Ardenia began as El bosque amoroso well before its publication
in 1615. Scholarly consensus advocates that La casa de los celos was
composed significantly earlier than its date of publication and earlier
than many of the other plays in the collection. An older style of verse,
the subject matter based on chivalric romance, and linguistic
similarities between it and Don Quixote, Part I suggest that Cervantes
composed the play at the same time or earlier than Part I in 1605; there
is a sonnet that appears in both. Evidence also suggests that Cervantes
originally wrote it as a four-act play, only changing it upon the rise in
popularity of the comedia nueva, thus dating the play perhaps to his
second era of dramatic writing between 1587 and 1605.19 Eisenberg
writes that Bernardo del Carpio in La casa de los celos ‘repeatedly
comments on the useless conflict between Christians, lacking any true
motive, and the need for Bernardo to return from his chivalric
adventures in France to dedicate his efforts to combatting the Moors.’20
This is a pertinent discussion in the 1580s that could fit in with the
other plays written in this early period. The connection between the
two titles, however, comes from the synonyms bosque and selva and
little else. The title of El bosque amoroso also lends itself to the notion
that the plot was pastoral and/or magical, which could coincide in
theme to La Galatea, also written in the early 1580s.
La Amaranta, o la del mayo is a title that also lends itself to a plot
involving the pastoral or the magical. Amaranta could be the name of
the main character; the amaranth flower, amaranto in Spanish, is
described by Covarrubias as a gold-coloured flower that grows about
elbow height with which girls make a wreath or garland. Its durability
and long-lasting scent contributed to the flowers symbolism of
immortality and incorruptibility. Covarrubias also refers to Andrés
Laguna’s (1499–1559) description of the flower in Dioscorides, Book 4,
Chapter 58, and in Chapter 29 of Book 3 as having etymological roots
in the word ‘unfading’.21 This is all symbolism that Cervantes could
have instilled in a female character who is seen as exotic; this could
perhaps provide the same exotic ‘otherness’ as found in the character of
Catalina de Oviedo in La gran sultana. There is also the imagery of an
incorruptible woman, morally and physically, like the Virgin Mary,
with a crown of golden flowers representing a halo over the
protagonists head; this imagery contrasts with the crown of thorns
thrust on her Son’s head at His crucifixion. Reference to the month of
May in the title could represent the rebirth of spring and the warmth of
the coming summer after a cold winter.
Cervantes mentions La confusa in ‘Adjunta al Parnaso’ as the comedy
of his that he esteems most and the one that made him the most
money. Canavaggio suggests the possibility that La confusa was
rewritten as El laberinto de amor, but with no evidence. We can only
speculate on the plot as being comical, perhaps a play of mistaken
identity. According to Covarrubias, a confuso is a person who is
bewildered or disturbed, one who does not know how to intimate or
insinuate.22 La confusa appears in the ‘concierto con Gaspar de Porres’,
dated 5 March 1585, but nothing else is known. The play gets a third
mention, matching La Numancia and Los tratos de Argel in number, in
Viaje del Parnaso, IV.16, indicating that this play that ‘pareció en los
teatros admirable’ [‘seemed so admirable in the theatres’] (v. 17) was
esteemed highly by the playwright. In this section of the play, he
mentions La Galatea (v. 14), La confusa, comedias (v. 20), although does
not refer to the collection published the following year, Don Quixote (v.
22), the Novelas ejemplares (v. 25), and the Persiles (v. 47) by name, in
addition to a ballad: ‘Yo he compuesto romances infinitos, / y el de los
celos es aquel que estimo, / entre otros que los tengo por malditos’ (vv.
40–2)23 [I have composed too many ballads to count, and the one about
jealousy is the one I esteem most, among others that I consider
damnable].
It is unclear if the reference to La única, y La bizarra Arsinda refers to
one play or two. The original 1614 publication of Viaje del Parnaso and
‘Adjunta al Parnaso’ where these plays (or play) are named has them at
the end of the list and with a comma separating the first phrase and the
conjunction: ‘La única, y La bizarra Arsinda’, There is no conjunction
prior to La única, suggesting that they are two different works, with La
bizarra Arsinda ending the list. However, following this title is the line
‘y otras muchas de que no me acuerdo’ [‘and many others that I don’t
remember’]. This could imply that that the reference is to the title of
one play, with ‘otras muchas’ as the end of the series, much in the same
vein of La Amaranta, o la del mayo and La casa de los celos, y selvas de
Ardenia, the latter of which includes a comma before the conjunction in
the original 1615 publication, even though many modern editions omit
it. The only notion of a possible plot is that Arsinda is the protagonist
and that her gallant exploits filled the action.
Entremeses
Several entremeses attributed to Cervantes have surfaced. As a writer
who embraced the interlude as a genre, it seems likely that he would
have written more than the eight he had printed in the 1615 collection.
As the entremeses from that collection are the subject of Chapter 17 of
this volume, I will not discuss in any detail the genre, form, or
conventions associated them. Instead, here I will address the six that
are most discussed in reference to Cervantine authorship: Los romances,
Los mirones, El entremés de Doña Justina y Calahorra, La cárcel de Sevilla,
El hospital de los podridos, and Los habladores.
Geoffrey Stagg provides an overview of the often hostile argument of
the date of composition and authorship of El entremés de los romances.
The most compelling aspect of Los romances are the thirteen similarities
between the interlude and Chapters 4, 5, and 7 of Don Quixote, Part I,
including the protagonist Bartolo going mad after reading ballads,
dressing up in armour, and riding out to fight.24 No one has ever
denied that one of these works influenced the other, but no consensus
of which came first has been established. It first appeared as an
anonymous interlude in the Tercera Parte de las comedias de Lope de
Vega, which enjoyed three editions in 1611, 1612, and 1613, and each
time this particular interlude had changes in the text. Rey Hazas and
Campa more recently published an extensive study on Los romances in
which they elaborate on these issues, but again, not coming to a
definite attribution.
El entremés de los mirones, first printed by Adolfo de Castro in 1874,
depicts several students who form a cofradía, a sort of guild or
brotherhood, through which they go out to the streets in pairs and
observe the daily routines of the people. Later in the evening they
return to the house of a Licenciado, a university graduate, who serves as
the master of the group, to discuss what they saw and to laugh at the
people. Los mirones is a satirical comedy in the thematic and linguistic
vein of a Cervantine interlude. Alfredo Rodríguez López-Vázquez once
again relies on the CORDE to demonstrate that ‘the work clearly
corresponds to Cervantes’s lexical style and that it must have been
written around 1615’.25 Alonso and Eugenio Asensio dismiss Cervantine
authorship, but Pérez de León identifies possible Cervantine
components of the short work.26
Rodríguez López-Vázquez takes the same approach with the
Entremés de Doña Justina y Calahorra, also published by Castro in 1874,
who says that Aureliano Fernández Guerra discovered it in the
Biblioteca Colombina in 1845 as a manuscript.27 Castro once again
seems to rely on gut feeling and superficial reaction to form his
attribution, rather than scholarly evidence. Liliana Muñoz, whose
article includes a critical edition of the entremés, presents more
evidence to refute Cervantine authorship than to support it, stating that
‘we cannot deny that this interlude, yes, contains similarities with
Cervantine style, but it seems more like imitation. It is evident that the
author read and assimilated Cervantes’s works, so popular in this era.’28
The interlude, written in verse, depicts the theme of infidelity in
marriage in a satirical manner. Returning to the CORDE, Rodríguez
López-Vázquez concludes that in fact the interlude, as proposed by
Castro, should be attributed to Cervantes.29
El entremés de la cárcel de Sevilla, attributed originally to Cristóbal de
Chaves, exists in two different manuscripts and was first attributed to
Cervantes in 1863 by Aureliano Fernández Guerra. Chaves had written
two parts of his Relación de la cárcel de Sevilla, but this interlude, which
according to Alonso is of higher artistic quality than the two parts of
Chaves’s account, is, among others he published, of ‘indisputable merit,
so much so that it on occasion equals, or even exceeds, the interludes
that are authentically Cervantine.’30 Peña Muñoz studies the
autobiographical nature of the play in relation to Cervantes’s time in
prison in Seville and in conjunction with his Entremés del rufián viudo
llamado Trampagos, concluding that she does not doubt that Cervantes
wrote it. The play depicts life in prison at the end of the sixteenth
century, and Peña Muñoz speculates that as autobiography and
authorship are interlinked, perhaps Cervantes did not include it in the
1615 collection because he wanted to hide his past incarceration.31
El entremés del hospital de los podridos depicts people suffering from a
variety of strange afflictions. The invalids include Cañizares,32 who
upon seeing a left-handed man in the street fears that something bad
will happen to him, and thus does not want to leave the house; Pero
Díaz, who cannot eat, drink, or sleep because of all the bad poetry in
the world; and Valenzuela, whose anger over seeing the good fortune of
his neighbour has poisoned his body. It was originally published in the
1617 Séptima Parte and again by Castro in 1874. Muñoz, referring to
Herta Calvo, contends that this interlude begins the practice of having
different character types come on stage and then leave, as Cervantes
does in El juez de los divorcios and La elección de los alcaldes de Daganzo,
both published in 1615.33 Asensio states that Hospital can stand
shoulder to shoulder with some of Cervantes’s authentic interludes in
terms of originality and the quality of its construction.34 Certainly the
structure and concerns expressed in the piece reflect those of
Cervantes’s other interludes.
Of the attributed interludes, El entremés famoso de los habladores is
the most often performed. It was originally published anonymously in
the Séptima parte de sus comedias (Lope de Vega, Madrid 1617) and
attributed to Cervantes by Aureliano Fernández Guerra. There are two
different extant versions of Los habladores, one printed in 1617 and
Manuel Foronda y Aguilera’s edition of 1881, which also appears in the
Biblioteca Virtual Cervantes. Foronda’s version includes numerous extra
lines, including ten extra lines at end, culminating in an awkward
phrase: ‘¡Qué dicha, señores / si todos los habladores / hablaran como
Cervantes!’ [What joy it would bring, ladies and gentlemen, if all
talkers talked like Cervantes!] It seems unlikely that Cervantes would
have included his own name so bluntly in this manner. The Foronda
version also includes scene divisions that do not appear in the 1617
version, and he provides no information on the source of these
alterations.
Los habladores appears in the 2010 publication of Cervantes’s Ocho
entremeses, edited by Carolyn Lukens-Olson, who used as her source the
1617 version. To date, this is the only edition of the 1615 works that
also includes one attributed interlude. The same version appears at the
end of her 2011 study on the influence of Erasmus on Cervantes, and
on this interlude specifically. Without delving into the question of
attribution, Lukens-Olson argues that ‘Cervantes’s concern with the
power of the spoken word as shown in the uses and abuses of rhetoric
is a unifying theme of his entremeses and demonstrates how Los
habladores shows the same concern’.35
Other Referenced Titles
Moving on from the stage, Cervantes gives us some titles of unknown
genre. The case of Las semanas del jardín has produced some
contradictory studies. Mentioned in the dedications of both the Ocho
comedias and Persiles, the title simply suggests that it could have a
pastoral theme, much like La Galatea, but no other information comes
from Cervantes other than these two brief references. In 1874, Adolfo
de Castro published the sixteenth-century manuscript of the ‘Diálogo
entre Cilenia y Selanio sobre la vida del campo sacado en limpio’
attributing it to Cervantes via comparisons with Book IV of La Galatea,
but his attribution was contradicted almost immediately. A century
later, Francisco López Estrada published the text as a good example of
the genre of the dialogue, but without referring to whom he thought
penned it. He dates the piece as being written between 1555 and 1565,
meaning that Cervantes would likely have been much too young.36
Daniel Eisenberg’s 1988 publication of the dialogue as being
Cervantes’s lost Las semanas del jardín resuscitated the argument but
without scholarship being able to come to any consensus; in fact, some
scholars overtly question Eisenberg’s attribution as lacking any solid
evidence that this dialogue and the work referred to in two isolated
dedications have any association. Eisenberg explains that ‘my boldness
stems from the beauty and the ideological interests that we find in the
text, and I am convinced that no one but Cervantes could have written
it, and that even if he is not the author, the mere possibility means it
deserves the study it has received’.37 While most scholars would agree
with the final component of this statement, I do not believe Eisenberg’s
perception of the beauty of the language and his subsequent analyses of
individual words and phrases constitute definitive proof. He chooses
various concepts and expressions and compares them with other
instances in which those same concepts and expressions appear in other
Cervantine works, ‘but the point is that the acceptance at face value of
any and all quotations culled from whatever source does not take tone
or context into account. Nor does it consider who is speaking and with
what relative authority. The rifling of texts for parallel pronouncements
is a dubious procedure in general, but it becomes especially hazardous
when dealing with one of the supreme ironists of all time’.38
Cuenca and Gómez study the manuscript palaeographically. They
date the dialogue to the end of the sixteenth century, so decades later
than López Estrada’s dating, thus opening up the possibility again that
Cervantes wrote the dialogue. However, their only conclusion is that it
is a copy made by a professional scribe, meaning that it was first
composed prior to this point, without being able to determine an exact
date of composition.39 Delving into the study of the genre of the
dialogue, they emphasize that Cervantes, in the extant works that are
authentic, did not write any dialogues in the post-Erasmian satiric or
didactic tradition.40 In fact, they posit that Las semanas del jardín would
likely be a collection of short novels and not a dialogue at all.41 The
context of the reference to the work in the prologue of the Novelas
ejemplares suggests that, along with the other works mentioned, Persiles
and Don Quixote, Part II, Las semanas del jardín would be a work in
novel or short novel form.42 Reference to the work in the dedication of
the Ocho comedias comes in conjunction with Persiles and the second
part of La Galatea, but we cannot assume that Las semanas del jardín is
also a novel. Of the three mentioned, only Persiles was printed, and we
do not know if Cervantes even began the other two.43
In the dedication of Persiles, Cervantes also refers to the Famoso
Bernardo, which Eisenberg has posited is Cervantes’s novel of chivalry.
We simply do not know what kind of work this story would be. It most
likely would have depicted Bernardo del Carpio, but as this reference,
written just days before his death, represents its only mention, then we
are only left to speculate.44 It could have been a Byzantine novel like
the Persiles, or perhaps even an epic poem. Cervantes was certainly
familiar with the epic genre; he read Ercilla’s Araucana, for example,
which was saved from the liquidation of Don Quoixote’s library in I.6,
and he possibly knew the poet personally. Cervantes also read the
works of Torquato Tasso, whose epic poem was adapted as the
attributed play La conquista de Jerusalén.
According to Eisenberg, Cervantes’s work on the famous Bernardo
del Carpio was likely to be a libro de caballerías, or a book of chivalric
knights-errant in the vein of Amadís de Gaula, Palmerín de Inglaterra, or
the tales of King Arthur and his knights. While I do not dispute this
possibility as nothing is known about Cervantes’s intentions with this
work other than this one reference, I am not convinced by all of
Eisenberg’s reasoning. He disregards the possibility of it being a play by
insisting that Cervantes stopped writing comedies by the end of his life
and that the works listed in Chapter IV of Viaje del Parnaso are
chronological.45 Also, as Cervantes had already written an epic poem in
verse, Eisenberg writes that he would not have broken the tradition of
epic poets from Antiquity to his day of writing just one poem; only
Homer had written two.46 There are times when trying to date
Cervantes’s works can prove difficult and sometimes impossible,
especially as so many have not survived; therefore, I cannot accept
Eisenberg’s statement about chronology as a factual conclusion as
categorically as he seems to here. Furthermore, I do not dismiss as
readily the notion that Cervantes would only have written one epic
poem in his life. As Eisenberg himself notes rather contradictorily, Lope
de Vega had written three epic poems by 1602.47 Furthermore,
Cervantes famously ignored many conventions of the day.
Finally, he suggests that as a book of knight errantry, Bernardo
would have needed his wise enchanter and chronicler as a hero of this
type of genre, suggesting that it would likely have been Santiago. The
alleged remains of the apostle were discovered during the reign of King
Alfonso II of Asturias, and it was also during this reign that the
legendary battle in which Bernardo del Carpio fought and killed Roldán
at Roncesvalles took place. Eisenberg emphasizes the association
between the Reconquista and both Bernardo del Carpio and Santiago,
particularly the latter’s guise of Matamoros, the Moor-Killer, insisting
that this tale of chivalry would have been an intensely religious and
patriotic one.48 With my interpretation of many of Cervantes’s works as
being negatively critical of the policies of Philip II—the abandonment
of the Mediterranean, and the futility of Christian versus Christian
warfare when the threat of Islam still looms—I would be more inclined
to believe that the exaltation of a legendary Spanish and Christian hero
saving Spain not only from Christian invaders, but also returning to
fight the Moors served the purpose of emphasizing Spain’s weaknesses
and sins during the time period in which Cervantes wrote. As Eisenberg
himself admits, this is all merely speculation.
There exists the additional possibility, when looking at this part of
the prologue of Persiles, that Cervantes never even began writing Las
semanas del jardín or Famoso Bernardo:
Todavía me quedan en el alma ciertas reliquias y asomos de Las
semanas del jardín y del Famoso Bernardo. Si, a dichas, por buena
ventura mía (que ya no sería ventura, sino milagro), me diese el cielo
vida, las verá y, con ellas, fin de La Galatea, de quien se está aficionado
Vuesa Excelencia.49
[I still have in my soul some vestiges and traces of Las semanas del
jardín and of the Famoso Bernardo. If, by my good fortune (which would
not be as much good fortune as it would be a miracle), heaven
prolonged my life, you will see them written, and with them, the end of
La Galatea, to which Your Excellency is partial.]
By using the words reliquias and asomos, one can interpret these as
being references to partial manuscripts, but that they remain in the
author’s soul (alma) almost suggests that they are works that he had
thought about often but not yet begun. There is a suggestion of
abstractness in these words. Perhaps they were simply being structured
in the author’s head and never experienced any concrete realization on
paper. Eisenberg states that we must accept that he kept the manuscript
for Bernardo for many years, returning to it periodically, when he had
raised the tastes of the vulgar people with Don Quixote.50 ‘As he only
mentions [Bernardo] in the dedication of his final work, we must accept
[the fact] that he had put the manuscript aside for many years,
returning to it after a time, when the tastes of common readers had
been elevated by Don Quixote.’51 I find it difficult to simply accept
anything about a writer who never followed any pre-established
generic boundaries with any of his surviving work, and who in fact
deliberately blurred those boundaries.
The third work mentioned in this excerpt is the second part of La
Galatea. At the end of La Galatea, the narrator states that if Cervantes’s
pastoral novel is received well, the second part of the tale will appear
‘con brevedad’, or very shortly.52 However, at his death over thirty
years later, the second part of La Galatea still had not materialized in
print. Cervantes continued to refer to this second part, promising his
readers a conclusion to the story. In Don Quixote, I.6, as the Barber and
the Curate liquidate Don Quixote’s library, they come to La Galatea,
stating:
Su libro tiene algo de buena invención: propone algo, y no concluye
nada; es menester esperar la segunda parte que promete: quizá con la
emienda alcanzará del todo la misericordia que ahora se le niega; y
entre tanto que esto se ve, tenedle recluso en vuestra posada, señor
compadre.53
[His book has some merit: he proposes something but concludes
nothing; we must wait for the second part that he has promised: maybe
with the sequel he will achieve the full measure of grace that is now
denied to him; in the meantime, keep this book locked up in your
quarters, my friend.]
Reference appeared once again in the dedications of Cervantes’s Ocho
comedias y ocho entremeses and of the Persiles. Whereas I have already
raised speculation about whether or not he had actually begun writing
the other works he mentions in the dedication of his Byzantine novel, it
seems likely that he had at least started the second part of La Galatea.
By saying at the end of the first part that it could appear ‘con
brevedad’, suggests that he had written enough of it to print if the 1585
printing had success. However, ‘this intention to continue the book was
Cervantes’s last romantic dream, which ended dissipated in failed
attempts’.54 The second part would no doubt have given a conclusion to
the narratives of Elicio, Erastro, Galatea, Florisa, and all the other
characters whom we meet; he might even have included a second elegy
to contemporary poets in the same vein as the ‘Canto de Calíope’.
Whether or not he had begun Part II, he remembered it on his deathbed
and included it in his dedication.
An attributed work that we know of is the novella La tía fingida, the
existence of which was brought to light by Isidoro Bosarte in 1787. He
attributed it to Cervantes for various reasons, among them his claim
that they are stylistically and structurally similar to the published
Novelas ejemplares, and that it appeared in manuscript form in the same
codex as two other Cervantine novelas: Rinconete y Cortadillo and El
celoso extremeño, both of which appeared in different versions in the
1613 publication. The published versions were based on those of a
codex in the Biblioteca Colombina in Seville, which also includes La tía
fingida. The other versions, referred to as the manuscripts of Porras de
la Cámara, were last seen in 1823, and only exist today as the basis of
an 1818 publication of all three novels prepared by Martín Fernández
de Navarrete. The attribution has had its detractors and supporters, but
many scholars will not commit to one viewpoint or the other without
definitive proof.
José Luis Madrigal contends that perhaps the reason why the novella
is ‘uncomfortable’ for some Cervantistas is because the protagonist, a
prostitute, does not die of tuberculosis or syphilis, nor does she face
any other form of ‘just end’, but instead marries a student from a good
family, in the same manner as Preciosa marries Andrés Caballero or the
illustrious washerwoman marries Juan de Avendaño.55 However, in his
study in which he identifies the idiolecto of the author, he finds ‘the
unmistakable timbre of Cervantes’. This study was subsequently
followed by analyses by Freddy López and Alfredo Rodríguez López-
Vázquez; the former applies complex statistical formulae to La tía
fingida in terms of words and phrases used in comparison to known
Cervantine works and those of other writers of the time. He concludes
that it is ‘extremely difficult to come to a concrete conclusion’ and that
a wider analysis using works by more authors would be necessary.56
The latter returns to the CORDE as he has done in other attribution
studies to assist him in mathematical studies of the novella and
concludes that there is a 95 per cent probability that Cervantes wrote
it.
Finally, it is worth mentioning El Buscapié, a ‘lost’ work by Cervantes
supposedly found by Antonio de Castro. When it appeared in print
edited by Castro in 1848, its attribution was refuted and accepted by
various academics.57 The work in prose consists of Cervantes as
narrator/character meeting a bachiller, or a university graduate, and it
serves as a defence of Don Quixote; in various editions of Cervantes’s
great novel published in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries,
El Buscapié appeared as a form of epilogue.58 Castro’s version is then
followed by nearly 200 pages of notes written by him explaining
various phrases and excerpts of El Buscapié. The work was in actuality
written by Castro himself, and it was published with him, and not
Cervantes, listed as the author in Manuel Fernández Nieto’s 1976
edition. In Cervantine style, the editor’s prologue to El Buscapié begins
by explaining that the manuscript appeared in his hands by chance; the
manuscript itself then states that it is a copy of a copy and there is no
knowledge of how it arrived in Spain.59 Such ambiguity certainly
coincides with Cervantes’s writings, as he creates layers between
himself and the reader, and Castro imitated well Cervantes’s style, his
debates about verisimilitude, and by using the CORDE, we see that he
even imitated well the language of the early seventeenth century.60
While Castro attempted to pull off a great literary hoax, it is still quite
impressive that he was not yet twenty-five years old when the book
was published, demonstrating a high level of intelligence at an early
age in his use of archaic language and form.
Despite the fact that we have commemorated the four hundredth
anniversary of the death of Cervantes, and even though the quantity of
academic studies focusing on his works is staggering, this chapter has
demonstrated further why and how there is always more to consider. A
man or Cervantes’s intelligence and drive, with a mind that was
constantly thinking, must have frequently put pen to paper, and the
possibilities of what he was able to produce are endless. We should
never be satisfied with the works that we have, but rather we should
continue to search for what else might be out there.
Works Cited
Allen, John J. ‘La casa de los celos and the 1605 Quijote’. In Cervantes for the 21st
Century/Cervantes para el siglo XXI, edited by Francisco La Rubia Prado
(Newark: Juan de la Cuesta, 2000), pp. 1–10.
Alonso, Dámaso. El hospital de los podridos y otros entremeses alguna vez atribuidos
a Cervantes (Madrid: Signo, 1936).
Arata, Stefano. ‘La conquista de Jerusalén, Cervantes, y la generación teatral de
1580’. Criticón 54 (1992): pp. 5–112.
Arata, Stefano. Los manuscritos teatrales de la Biblioteca del Palacio (siglos XVI y
XVII) (Pisa: Giardini, 1989).
Arata, Stefano. ‘Notas sobre La conquista de Jerusalén y la transmisión
manuscrita del primer teatro cervantino’. Edad de Oro 16 (1997): pp. 53–66.
Asensio, Eugenio. Itinerario del entremés. Desde Lope de Rueda a Quiñones de
Benavente. Madrid, Gredos, 1971.
Baras Escolá, Alfredo. ‘Los textos de Cervantes. Teatro’. Anales cervantinos 42
(2010): pp. 73–88.
Braudel, Ferdinand. The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the
Age of Philip II, 2 vols, translated by Sian Reynolds (Waukegan, IL: Fontana,
1986)
Brioso Santos, Héctor. ‘A propósito de la historicidad de La conquista de
Jerusalén: Los cuatro milagros de la Primera Cruzada’. Anuario de Estudios
Cervantinos 5 (2009): pp. 101–24.
Brioso Santos, Héctor. ‘Análisis métrico de La conquista de Jerusalén por Godofre
de Bullón de…¿Miguel de Cervantes?’. In Cuatrocientos años del Arte nuevo de
hacer comedias de Lope de Vega: Actas selectas del XIV congreso de la Asociación
Internacional de Teatro español y novohispano de los Siglos de Oro, edited by
Germán Vega García-Luengos and Héctor Urzáiz Tortajada (Salamanca:
Olmedo clásico, 2007), pp. 287–94.
Brioso Santos, Héctor. ‘Introducción’. In La conquista de Jerusalén por Godofre de
Bullón. Atribuida a Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra, edited by Brioso Santos
(Madrid: Cátedra, 2009), 9–114.
Canavaggio, Jean. Cervantes, translated by Mauro Armiño (Madrid: Espasa,
1997).
Castillo, Moisés R. ‘Espacios de ambigüedad en el teatro cervantino: La conquista
de Jerusalén y los dramas de cautiverio’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes
Society of America 32, no. 2 (2012): 123–42.
Castro, Adolfo de. Varias obras inéditas de Cervantes (Madrid: A. de Carlos e
Hijos, 1874).
Cerezo Soler, Juan. ‘La conquista de Jerusalén en su contexto: sobre el personaje
coelctiveo y una vuelta más a la atribución cervantina’. Dicenda: Cuaderno de
Filología Hispánica 32 (2014): pp. 33–49.
Cerezo Soler, Juan. ‘La conquista de Jerusalén y la literatura de Cervantes.
Nuevas semejanzas que respaldan su autoría.’—In Festina lenta: Actas del II
Congreso Internacional Jóvenes Investigadores Siglo de Oro (JISO 2012), edited
by Carlos Mata Induráin, Adrián J. Sáez, and Ana Zúñiga Lacruz (Pamplona:
Universidad de Navarra, 2013), pp. 79–93.
Cervantes Saavedrea, Miguel de. Don Quijote de la Mancha, edited by John. J.
Allen (Madrid: Cátedra, 1997).
Cervantes Saavedrea, Miguel de. Entremeses, edited by Nicholas Spadaccini
(Madrid: Cátedra, 1997).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. La Galatea, edited by Francisco Estrada and
María Teresa López García-Berdoy (Madrid: Cátedra, 1995).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda, edited by
Carlos Romero Muñoz (Madrid: Cátedra, 1995).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Viaje del Parnaso and ‘Adjunta al Parnaso’. In
Obras completas, vol. III, ed. by Manuel Arroyo Stephens (Madrid: Castro
Turner, 1993).
Close, Anthony. ‘Reseña de Eisenberg, Las semanas del jardín de Miguel de
Cervantes’. Journal of Hispanic Philology 14 (1991), 305–8.
Covarrubias, Sebastián de. Tesoro de la lengua castellana o española (Madrid: Luis
Sánchez, 1611).
Cuenca, Paloma and Jesús Gómez. ‘La atribución cervantina de un diálogo
anónimo renacentista’. eHumanista/Cervantes I (2012), pp. 81–102.
Eisenberg, Daniel. ‘Cervantes, autor de la Topographía e historia general de Argel,
publicada por Diego de Haedo’. Cervantes 16, 1 (1996): pp. 32–53.
Eisenberg, Daniel. ‘El Bernardo de Cervantes fue su libro de caballerías’. Anales
Cervantinos 21 (1983): pp. 103–18.
Eisenberg, Daniel. Las semanas del jardín de Miguel de Cervantes, edited by
Eisenberg (Salamanca: Diputación de Salamanca, 1988).
Eisenberg, Daniel. ‘¿Qué escribió Cervantes?’. In Sobre Cervantes, edited by
Diego Martínez Torrón (Alcalá de Henares: Centro de Estudios Cervantinos,
2003), pp. 9–26.
Estrada, Francisco and María Teresa López García-Berdoy. ‘Introducción’ to La
Galatea by Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra, edited by Estrada and López
García-Berdoy (Madrid: Cátedra, 1995), pp. 9–143.
Fernández, Enrique. ‘Los tratos de Argel: obra testimonial, denuncia política y
literatura terapéutica’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America
20, no. 1 (2000): pp. 7–26.
Fernández Nieto, Manuel. En torno a un apócrifo cervantino: El Buscapié de
Adolfo de Castro (Madrid: Graficas Alcocén, 1976).
Henry, Melanie. The Signifying Self: Cervantine Drama as Counter-Perspective
Aesthetic (London: MHRA, 2013).
Hermenegildo, Alfredo. Introduction to Tragedia de la destruyción de
Constantinopla by Gabriel Lobo Lasso de la Vega (Kassal: Reichenberger,
1983), pp. 3–71.
Huerta 
Calvo, 
Javier. 
Historia 
del 
teatro 
breve 
en 
España. 
Madrid:
Iberoamericana, 2008.
Kahn, Aaron M. ‘Idealising the Present with Future Histories: Ercilla, Cervantes,
and Lobo Lasso de la Vega’, In On Wolves and Sheep: Exploring the Expression of
Political Thought in Golden Age Spain, edited by Kahn (Newcastle-upon-Tyne:
Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2011), pp. 23–50.
Kahn, Aaron M. The Ambivalence of Imperial Discourse: Cervantes’s La Numancia
within the ‘Lost Generation’ of Spanish Drama (1570–90) (Oxford: Peter Lang,
2008).
Kahn, Aaron M. ‘Towards a Theory of Attribution: Is La conquista de Jerusalén by
Miguel de Cervantes?’, Journal of European Studies 40, no. 2 (2010): pp. 99–
128.
López, Freddy. ‘Donde se muestran algunos resultados de atribución de autor en
torno a la obra cervantina’. Revista Colombiana de Estadística 34, no. 1 (2011):
pp. 15–37.
Lukens-Olson, Carolyn. ‘Cervantes’s Attributed Los habladores and Erasmus’s
Ciceronianus: Satire and Emulation’. In On Wolves and Sheep: Exploring the
Expression of Political Thought in Golden Age Spain, edited by Aaron M. Kahn
(Newcastle-upon-Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2011), pp. 51–72.
Lukens-Olson, Carolyn (ed). Los entremses by Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra
(Neward, DE: Juan de la Cuesta, 2010).
Madrigal, José Luis. ‘Algunas reflexiones en torno a la atribución cervantina del
“Diálogo entre Cilena y Selanio sobre la vida del campo”’. Cervantes: Bulletin
of the Cervantes Society of America 24, no. 1 (2004): pp. 217–52.
Madrigal, José Luis. ‘De cómo y por qué La tía fingida es de Cervantes’. Antifara
2 (2003): pp. 1–18.
Montero Reguera, José. ‘Cervantes: Comedias’. In Diccionario Filológico de
Literatura Española. Siglo XVI (Madrid: Castalia, 2009), pp. 209–12.
Montero Reguera, José. ‘Historia, política y literatura en La Galatea de Miguel
de Cervantes’. Romeral: Estudios filosóficos en homenaje a José Antonio
Fernández Romero, edited by I. Báez y María Rosa Pérez (Vigo: Universidad de
Vigo, 2002), pp. 329–42.
Montero Reguera, José. ‘La conquista de Jerusalén por Godofre de Bullón’. In Gran
enciclopedia cervantina, Vol. 9 (Madrid: Castalia, 2005), pp. 2695–6.
Montero Reguera, José. ‘La obra literaria de Miguel de Cervantes (Ensayo de un
catálogo)’. In Cervantes, edited by Anthony Close, et al. (Madrid: Centro de
Estudios Cervantinos, 1995), pp. 43–71.
Montero Reguera, José. ‘¿Una nueva obra teatral cervantina?: Notas en torno a
una reciente atribución’. Anales cervantinos 33 (1995–97): pp. 355–66.
Muñoz, Liliana. ‘A propósito de Doña Justina y Calahorra, un entremés atribuido
a Cervantes’. Anales cervantinos 43 (2011): pp. 299–323.
Parr, James A. ‘Review of Las semanas del jardín edited by Daniel Eisenberg’.
Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 10, no. 2 (1990), pp.
101–2.
Peña Muñoz, Margarita, ‘Cervantes y el entremés de la cárcel de Sevilla.’ Actas del
XVI Congreso de la Asociación Internacional de Hispanistas: Nuevos caminos del
hispanismo…París, del 9 al 13 de julio de 2007. Ed. By Pierre Civil and
Françoise Crémoux. Madrid: Iberoamericana-Vervuert, 2010, n.p.
Pérez de León, Vicente. Tablas destempladas: Los entremeses de Cervantes a
examen (Alcalá de Henares: Centro de Estudios Cervantinos, 2005).
Rey Hazas, Antonio. ‘Estudio del Entremés de los romances.’ Revista de Estudios
Cervantinos 1 (2007), pp. 1–57.
Rey Hazas, Antonio and Mariano de la Campa, El nacimiento del Quijote: edición
y estudio del Entremés de los romances (Guanajuato: Consejo Editorial del
Gobierno del Estado de Guanajuato, 2006).
Rodríguez López-Vázquez, Alfredo. ‘Cervantes y el entremés de “Los Mirones”’.
Etiópicas 7 (2011): pp. 57–63.
Rodríguez López-Vázquez, Alfredo. ‘Dos entremeses de Cervantes: Doña Justina
y Calahorra y La cárcel de Sevilla’. Antifara 13 (2013): pp. 1–11.
Rodríguez López-Vázquez, Alfredo. ‘La Jerusalén de Cervantes: Nuevas pruebas
de su Autoría’. Artifara 11 (2011): pp. 1–6.
Romero Ferrer, Alberto and Yolanda Vallejo Márquez. ‘Una explicación del
Quijote y un Avellaneda del siglo XIX: Adolfo de Castro y su falso Buscapié’
San Segundo Fernández, Eugenia. Cervantes y el Buscapié: un estudio de atribución
(Madrid: Iberoamericana Vervuert, 2010).
Schevill, Rodolfo and Adolfo Bonilla. ‘Introducción’ to Obras completas de
Cervantes, vol. 5 (Madrid: B. Rodríguez, 1920), pp. 5–149.
Stagg, Geoffrey. ‘Don Quijote and the “Entremés de los romances”: A
Retrospective’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 22, no. 2
(2002): pp. 129–50.
Watson, Anthony. Juan de la Cueva and the Portuguese Succession (London:
Tamesis, 1971).
Weiner, Jack. Cuatro ensayos sobre Gabriel Lobo Lasso de la Vega (1555–1615)
(Valencia: Universitat de València, 2005).
1 Madrigal, ‘Algunas reflexiones…’, pp. 218–19; all translations into English
have been done by the author of this chapter unless otherwise noted.
2 See, for example, Eisenberg ‘Repaso crítico…’, Eisenberg ‘¿Qué escribió
Cervantes?, and Montero Reguera, ‘Catálogo…’, which includes a thorough list
of Cervantes’s works and those attributed to him.
3 Cervantes, ‘Adjunta al Parnaso’, p. 636.
4 ‘It has been thought that some of the pieces from the era of La Numancia
were retouched and corrected. El bosque amoroso, La gran turquesca, and La
confusa would be works wrongly considered lost: re-baptized, respectively as La
casa de los celos, La gran sultana, and El laberinto de amor’ (Canavaggio,
Cervantes, p. 342).
5 See Kahn, ‘Even Further…’ for more on the actor’s sheet of Ocasión.
6 Watson, pp. 27–8.
7 See Kahn, ‘Moral Opposition…’ and Kahn, The Ambivalence…, particularly
Chapter 1, for a thorough discussion of these playwrights in this context.
8 See Fernández for a thorough discussion of these points.
9 The actors’ sheets for La conquista de Jerusalén and the aforementioned
actor’s sheet for Ocasión in Tratos are coincidentally housed in the same file in
the BNE.
10 Godofre de Bullón was a legendary figure in Cervantes’s time. Cervantes
refers to him indirectly twice in Don Quixote, Part I, as a member of los nueve de
la fama, or the Nine Worthies (I.5, p. 126, and I.20, p. 246), and once directly in
the discussion between the priest and the canon on the value of literature (I.48,
p. 558).
11 Kahn, ‘Even Further…’, p. 139.
12 Castillo, p. 436.
13 Kahn, ‘Idealising…’, p. 37.
14 See Kahn, ‘Idealising the…’, Hermenegildo, and Weiner.
15 Similar arguments were extended by Antonio de Valdes’s defence of
Charles V’s imperial troops sacking Rome in 1527 and imprisoning Pope
Clement VII.
16 Covarrubias, p. 233v (my emphasis); [s.v. Costantinopla]
17 Henry, p. 92.
18 Schevill y Bonilla, pp. 99–100.
19 See Allen for a detailed study of these points, especially p. 2.
20 Eisenberg, ‘Bernardo…’, pp. 112–13; I have translated ‘arente’ from the
original Spanish to ‘lacking’ in this sentence under the assumption that it is a
misprint and should read ‘carente’.
21 Covarrubias, p. 63r; [s.v. amaranto]. Dioscorides is also mentioned in Don
Quixote, I.18, p. 235.
22 Covarrubias, p. 232r; [s.v. confundir].
23 Cervantes, Viaje del Parnaso, p. 577.
24 Stagg, p. 133. This article is followed by a critical edition of the interlude
by Stagg and Eisenberg.
25 Rodríguez López-Vázquez, ‘Cervantes y…’, p. 57.
26 Pérez de León, pp. 82–3.
27 Castro, p. 5
28 Muñoz, p. 306.
29 Rodríguez López-Vázquez, ‘Dos entremeses…’, p. 8.
30 Alonso, p. 10.
31 Peña Muñoz, n.p.
32 A character called Cañizares also appears in Cervantes’s Entremés del viejo
celoso published in 1615.
33 Huerta Calvo, p. 27.
34 Asensio, p. 15.
35 Lukens-Olson, ‘Cervantes’s Attributed…’, p. 51fn.
36 Montero Reguera, ‘La obra…’, pp. 45–6.
37 Eisenberg, ‘Introducción’, p. 14.
38 Parr, p. 102.
39 Cuenca and Gómez, pp. 85–6.
40 See also Close, p. 306.
41 Cuenca and Gómez, p. 87. In a footnote to his edition of Persiles, Carlos
Romero Muñoz also states that the work would have been a collection of short
novels, each linked to each other, following the style of Boccaccio’s Decameron
(p. 108).
42 ‘Tras ellas [las novelas], si la vida no me deja, te ofrezco los Trabajos de
Persiles…y primero verás, y con brevedad dilatadas, las hazañas de don Quijote
y donaires de Sancho Panza, y luego las Semanas del jardín’ (Cervantes, Novelas
ejemplares, vol. I, pp. 52–3). [Following the Exemplary Novels, if life does not
leave my body, I will offer you the Travels of Persiles…first you will see, with
brevity the drawn-out deeds of Don Quixote and the clever observations of
Sancho Panza, and then after the Weeks in the Garden].
43 ‘Luego irá el gran Persiles, y luego Las semanas del jardín, y luego la
segunda parte de La Galatea, si tanta carga pueden llevar mis ancianos hombros’
(Cervantes, Entremeses, p. 95) [Then will appear the great Persiles, and then
Weeks in the Garden, and then the second part of La Galatea, if my ancient
shoulders can bear such a burden].
44 Cervantes refers to Bernardo del Carpio multiple times in Don Quixote: I.1,
I.6, I.26, I.49, II.32. He is a character in La casa de los celos.
45 Eisenberg, ‘El Bernardo…’, pp. 106–7.
46 Eisenberg, ‘El Bernardo…’, p. 109.
47 Eisenberg, ‘El Bernardo…’, p. 109.
48 Eisenberg, ‘El Bernardo…’, p. 116.
49 Cervantes, Los trabajos…, pp. 108–9.
50 Eisenberg, ‘El Bernardo…’, p. 110.
51 Eisenberg, ‘El Bernardo…’, p. 110.
52 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 629.
53 Cervantes, Don Quijote, I.6, p. 137.
54 Estrada and López García-Berdoy, p. 100.
55 Madrigal, ‘De cómo…’, n.p.
56 López, p. 45. Despite this suggestion, López recognizes the similarities
between La tía fingida and other Cervantine works, as well as a statistical
similarity to Alonso Fernández de Avellaneda.
57 Romero Ferrer and Vallejo Márquez provide an informative history of the
reception of El Buscapié
58 Romero Ferrer and Vallejo Márquez, p. 250.
59 Castro, El Buscapié, pp. v–vi.
60 See San Segundo Fernández for an in-depth study on the language of El
Buscapié.
Section 6
Sources, Influences, and
Contemporaries
Chapter 23
Cervantes’s Sources and Influences
Stacey Triplette
University of Pittsburgh at Greensburg
Miguel de Cervantes’s literary works reference a complex set of
ancient, medieval, and early modern sources. David Quint argues that
citational practices like those of Cervantes, which favour imitation,
commentary, and parody, constitute a version of originality particular
to the writers of the early modern period.1 For Quint, intertextuality
allowed writers to measure themselves ‘not only against the past but
also the future’.2 Cervantes in particular is aware of his own historicity
and of his place in a chain of imitation, and he adapts and combines
sources in ways that are often difficult to unravel. E. Michael Gerli
defines the recurring pattern of Cervantine referentiality as ‘[i]ronic
reversal followed by reconstruction’.3 The interplay among sources and
the irony with which Cervantes treats his models allow new and
contradictory meanings to emerge. This essay does not pretend to be
exhaustive in its treatment of Cervantes’s sources, but it does offer the
reader a guide to many of the most important influences on Cervantes’s
literary production from Spain, early modern Europe, and classical
antiquity.
Spanish Sources
Critics have often described Don Quixote as a novel, even the first
modern novel; however, that genre designation depends on criteria that
emerged after Cervantes’s lifetime.4 Much of what readers perceive as
modern or novelesque in Don Quixote arises from the work’s
heterogeneity of form and diversity of source material. In Don Quixote,
Cervantes places a variety of early modern literary genres into
conversation and conflict. Gerli points out that Cervantes layers his
intertexts, reiterating earlier references and rewriting his own already
citational episodes.5 Chivalric interlace, important in Don Quixote at the
level of plot, also serves as a primary organizing principle for the
work’s approach to genre, as Cervantes alternates and interweaves
episodes that ally themselves to a variety of distinct early modern
literary forms.6 The narrative landscape of Don Quixote absorbs the
romance of chivalry, the picaresque, the pastoral romance, the
sentimental romance, the romancero or ballad tradition, and lyric
poetry. In the case of La Galatea and Los trabajos de Persiles y
Sigismunda, the works align themselves more clearly with single genres
—the pastoral romance and the ancient Greek novel, respectively—but
references to other genres appear scattered throughout the works.
Cervantes’s dialogue with the Iberian romance of chivalry also
supplies many of the motifs and character archetypes of Don Quixote,
Parts I and II. According to Mancing, ‘[w]ithout the romances of
chivalry, Don Quixote does not exist’.7 Mancing describes the basic
pattern of Cervantine chivalric adventure as one in which landscape
cues drive Don Quixote into a chivalric mode of interpretation, which
in turn induces linguistic archaism adapted from the books of chivalry.8
Williamson emphasizes the fact that Don Quixote is not always mad:
‘Don Quixote always sees empirical phenomena as they appear unless
they remind him of chivalric reality. He is aware that appearances are
deceptive in a fallen world, so he wants to go beyond appearances to
the essence of things.’9
The chivalric ‘reality’ Don Quixote imagines is in large part the
world of Amadís de Gaula. Garci Rodríguez de Montalvo’s four-volume
Amadís (1508) tells the story of a young knight’s rise to prominence in
pre-Arthurian Britain and Gaul and his faithful love for the lady Oriana.
The romance as we know it today is a fifteenth-century edition and
compilation of a three-part medieval ‘primitive’ text, now lost, with an
added fourth part.10 The medieval portion of the text owes a debt to
French romance, particularly the thirteenth-century Lancelot en prose.11
Montalvo also wrote an original sequel about Amadís’s son, Las Sergas
de Esplandián (1510). Of the other sixteenth-century writers who wrote
continuations 
of 
Amadís, 
Cervantes 
demonstrates 
a 
particular
familiarity with Feliciano de Silva, whose pastorally inclined sequels
receive disparaging mentions in Don Quixote.12 René Girard famously
describes Don Quixote’s relationship to the character Amadís as one of
‘triangular’ desire, in which the model of Amadís mediates between
Don Quixote and the world; the only thing the Cervantine character
desires is to imitate Amadís.13 Cervantes adapts many of Amadís’s
famous exploits for his knight, most prominently Amadís’s love-induced
retreat from the world to the hermitage at Peña Pobre. Other chivalric
episodes in Don Quixote, such as the battles with ‘giants’ during the
episodes of the windmills and the wineskins, draw on Amadís and other
Iberian romances’ typical modes of representing ethnic and physical
difference in their famous monsters.14
Cervantes’s extensive imitation of chivalric romance is not
necessarily admiring. The amigo of the prologue to Part I reminds the
author: ‘llevad la mira puesta a derribar la máquina mal fundada destos
caballerescos libros, aborrecidos de tantos y alabados de muchos más’
[‘Keep your eye on the goal of demolishing the ill-founded apparatus of
these chivalric books, despised by so many and praised by so many
more’].15 Diana de Armas Wilson states that Cervantes treats the books
of chivalry with ‘affectionate malice’, which is perhaps most on display
during the scrutiny of the books in the sixth chapter of Part I.16 The
priest and barber’s mock inquisition represents the romance of chivalry
as both antiquated and in poor taste and condemns many such books to
the pyre. Yet, the priest expresses grudging admiration for some
romances, notably Amadís de Gaula and Joanot Martorell’s Catalan
romance Tirant lo Blanch.17 In addressing chivalric romance, Cervantes
employs the fundamental ambivalence with which he treats all source
works. Daniel Eisenberg points out that chivalric publication had all
but ended in the Iberian Peninsula by the late sixteenth century,
primarily due to lack of support from monarch Philip II.18 Eisenberg
describes moral and literary objections to the romances of chivalry as
secondary causes for the genre’s decline.19 Don Quixote assures the
romance of chivalry an afterlife in parody rather than hastening its
demise.
The early modern picaresque, like chivalric narrative, is an evident
source for Don Quixote. The term picaresque in the Spanish tradition
refers to narratives that recount in first person the adventures of urban
rogues or pícaros who climb the social ladder by questionable means.
Cruz notes that the picaresque genre’s depiction of disenfranchised
characters as delinquents and criminals responds to sixteenth-century
‘religious and social upheavals’ and renders the most vulnerable
members of society scapegoats.20 Rico identifies the three most
important picaresque novels as the 1554 Lazarillo de Tormes, Mateo
Alemán’s Guzmán de Alfarache (1599, 1604), and Francisco de
Quevedo’s El Buscón (1626).21 As Cruz points out, some scholars do not
categorize Lazarillo as picaresque given that the word pícaro does not
appear until the Guzmán.22 Don Quixote shares with the picaresque
genre an unflinching depiction of the demands of the human body:
hunger, thirst, injury, desire, and physical suffering receive specific and
consistent treatment. The character of Sancho Panza, who serves a
master and constantly references the corporeal, might be quite at home
in a picaresque novel. However, Cervantes’s specific references to the
picaresque are largely confined to the minor character Ginés de
Pasamonte and his alter ego, the puppeteer Maese Pedro. Chained
among the galeotes in Part I, Ginés de Pasamonte has a life story that
resembles that of Alemán’s Guzmán. The character mentions Lazarillo
specifically and declares that he is writing his own autobiography,
referencing the primary narrative device of the picaresque.23 In true
picaresque fashion, Ginés surfaces with a new name and profession in
Part II. Don Quixote’s destruction of Maese Pedro’s puppets is a typical
misfortune for the pícaro, whose rise is always limited by a drive to
assure aristocratic and bourgeois readers that the poor do not threaten
their social dominance.24 Cervantes’s use of the picaresque is not
limited to Don Quixote. The exemplary novels La ilustre fregona, Rinconte
y Cortadillo, and El coloquio de los perros are often discussed in terms of
the picaresque, and E. Michael Gerli makes a case for El licenciado
vidriera as a ‘rewriting’ of the genre.25
The idealistic pastoral romance or novela pastoril, the ideological
opposite of the picaresque, is a major intertext for both Don Quixote
and La Galatea. Cervantes’s primary pastoral model is Jorge de
Montemayor’s La Diana, an ‘instant best-seller’ published in at least
twenty-six editions in the second half of the sixteenth century.26 Gil
Polo’s continuation of Montemayor, La Diana Enamorada (1559), also
earns praise during the priest and barber’s scrutiny of the books in Don
Quixote, Part I.27 Spanish pastoral romances combine narrative and
verse forms in order to treat themes of love, beauty, and poetic
achievement in bucolic settings. The characters are nominally
shepherds and shepherdesses, but all are also poet-singers, and their
verses recall Virgil’s Bucolics (37 bc) as well as Petrarchan poetry.28
Jacopo Sannazaro’s Arcadia (1504) is likewise an important intertext
for these works, providing the Spanish pastoral novel with a model for
the alternation of poetry and prose and the focus on ‘the lover, his
poetic artistry, and his relation to nature’.29 While the pastoral as it is
expressed in Galatea has a distinct identity from chivalric romance, it is
no coincidence that the most famous pastoral episode of Don Quixote,
the tale of Marcela and Grisóstomo, follows directly on the hidalgo’s
musing on the Lancelot ballad ‘Nunca fuera caballero de damas tan
bien servido’ [‘Never was a knight / so well served by ladies’].30
According to Avalle-Arce and Cravens, chivalric romance is an
important source text for the Spanish pastoral.31 Feliciano de Silva’s
bucolic interludes establish a pattern, maintained in Jorge de
Montemayor’s Diana and Cervantes’s Galatea, of featuring aristocratic
and bourgeois characters thinly disguised as rustic poets. Hernández-
Pecoraro categorizes both the books of chivalry and the pastoral as
subgenres of ‘amatory literature’, which ‘promote[d] a model of love
that depended not on an equalizing relationship between men and
woman but rather on traditional and limiting notions of feminine
beauty, chastity, and virtue’.32 While women appear to be the primary
focus of the pastoral, Hernández-Pecoraro argues that in both Diana
and Galatea, women’s absence is more noticeable than its presence, and
male characters praise women as ‘objects of abstract splendor and
virtue’.33 The episode of Marcela and Grisóstomo in Don Quixote, Part I,
in which inhabitants of a rural idyll accuse the disdainful Marcela of
provoking Grisóstomo’s suicide, does not depart from the tropes of the
pastoral. Rather, it depicts a logical if sinister endpoint for the stories of
unhappy lovers that populate the pastoral genre.
The sentimental romance, an early modern narrative form that
serves as a precursor for the epistolary novel in Europe, is, like the
pastoral, hybrid in its genre characteristics. The sentimental novel
employs a combination of narrative, interpolated letters, and dialogue
to represent stories of unrequited or ill-fated love. Brownlee traces the
genre’s roots to classical and Italian literature, with Ovid’s Heroides
(c.25–16 bc) and Giovanni Boccaccio’s Elegia di Madonna Fiammetta
(1343) as important intertexts.34 Although the sentimental novel both
invites a female readership and allows women’s psychology and
women’s voices to emerge through letters, female characters remain
marginalized, victims of enclosure and the predation of men.
The most famous examples of the genre in early modern Spain are
Diego de San Pedro’s Arnalte y Lucenda (1491) and La cárcel de amor
(1492). Both stories are told from the point of view of the auctor, who
plays messenger and go-between for love-struck male protagonists
Arnalte and Leriano. Both male characters suffer the disdain of the
novels’ female protagonists, and their pursuit of Lucenda and Laureola
compromises the women’s honour. The effects of love are fatal in
Cárcel; Laureola is nearly executed for the perceived licentiousness of
her behaviour, and Leriano dies of lovesickness. The intertwined stories
of Cardenio, Luscinda, Fernando, and Dorotea in Don Quixote, Part I
have been discussed in connection to the sentimental novel. Cervantes
tells these stories in part through a letter exchange between Cardenio
and Luscinda, into which Fernando intrudes, reading Luscinda’s letter
over Cardenio’s shoulder. Severin identifies direct connections between
Cardenio and Luscinda’s love affair and Arnalte y Lucenda, and Spiller
argues that the Cervantine lovers conflate examples from Amadís de
Gaula and the sentimental novel.35
The letters of the novela sentimental also leave an imprint on Galatea
and Persiles. In La Galatea, Silerio cites an exchange of love letters
during his narration of the erotic quadrangle that involves himself, his
close friend Timbrio, the beautiful Nísida, and her younger sister
Blanca.36 Persiles evokes the sentimental novel in two episodes, both of
which constitute amatory failures. In the first case, written
communication fails to achieve its purpose; acquaintances Rutilio and
Clodio write generic, self-interested love letters to Policarpa and
Auristela that never accomplish their goals.37 Rutilio recognizes the
folly of his enterprise and never sends the letter. Clodio receives an
immediate, deadly punishment for tricking Auristela into reading his
false declaration of love in the form of a stray arrow that pierces his
mouth and tongue, a clear instance of poetic justice.38 In the second
case, an episode at the Isla de las Ermitas features two minor characters
from Spain, Eusebia and Renato, living out the final phase of a Cárcel
de amor-like plot. As in Cárcel, Renato’s love for Eusebia results in
gossip, a duel, and the compromise of the young woman’s honour.
Renato and Eusebia retreat in shame to Scandinavia to carry out a
chaste penance.39 In the course of Persiles the main characters help
them restore their lost reputations and marry, but this recompense only
occurs after their youth has been utterly wasted.40
Cervantes cites early modern poetic genres in addition to narrative
ones. La Galatea is a hybrid work that follows Montemayor, Polo, and
Italian writer Sannazaro in housing long and short verse forms inside a
narrative pastoral frame. In his lyric poetry, Cervantes owes a
particular debt to Spanish poet Garcilaso de la Vega, who participated
in the classicizing vogue of the early modern era and, like Cervantes,
had extensive contact with Italy and Italian poetic form.41 Dudley
argues that Garcilaso’s eclogues, particularly Égloga I, are an important
intertext and structuring device for La Galatea. Cervantes incorporates
one of Garcilaso’s most famous verses, ‘Oh más dura que mármol a mis
quejas’ [‘o harder than marble against my complaints’], in the last
poetic exchange of La Galatea, between the distant Gelasia and the
resentful Lenio.42 In Cervantes, the verse appears as Lenio’s refrain; it is
both homage to Garcilaso and, in Dudley’s words, a ‘conclusive farewell
to the pastoral world’, appropriate for the end of the work.43 Aladro-
Font and Ramos Tremolada identify four citations of Garcilaso in Part I
of Don Quixote and fifteen in Part II.44 In two places, Cervantes cites
Garcilaso during rites for the dead. He adapts a phrase from verse 605–
6 of Garcilaso’s ‘Égloga II,’ ‘recebid las palabras que la boca / echa con
la doliente alma fuera’ [‘receive the words the mouth / pours out with
the suffering soul’], in Don Quixote, Part II as part of Grisóstomo’s
‘Canción desesperada’.45 In Part II, the musician at Altisidora’s false
funeral performs part of Garcilaso’s third eclogue, and Altisidora
herself, revived, levels a gender-adapted version of Garcilaso’s verse
‘Oh más duro que mármol a mis quejas’ at the knight.46 Don Quixote
himself points out the apparent incongruity: ‘¿qué tienen que ver las
estancias de Garcilaso con la muerte de esta señora?’ [‘What do stanzas
by Garcilaso have to do with the death of this lady?’].47 For Aladro-
Font and Ramos Tremolada, in Part II of Don Quixote, Garcilaso’s poetry
is as important an intertext as the romances of chivalry and in fact
competes with chivalry as a structuring device. The openness of the
citation of Garcilaso and its frequency reflects a pastoral evolution in
Quixote’s personality.48
In two of his works, Galatea and Viaje del Parnaso, Cervantes makes
further commentary on his poetic influences by offering catalogues of
contemporary poets. In Galatea, the muse Calíope attends the memorial
rites for the shepherd-poet Meliso, identified with Diego Hurtado de
Mendoza.49 She praises living Spanish poets and other writers,
including the dramatist-poet Cristobal de Virués, dramatist Lope de
Rueda, and epic poet Alonso de Ercilla, whose Araucana also receives a
positive mention from the priest during the scrutiny of the books.50
Calíope in Galatea also expresses admiration for the work of Luis de
Góngora. In Viaje del Parnaso, as in Galatea, many of the poets depicted
on the voyage to poetic fame have less name recognition today than in
Cervantes’s time, but the Viaje does make admiring references to Luis
de Góngora, Francisco de Quevedo, and Lope de Vega.51
Finally, Cervantes participates in the great Iberian commercial art
form of his time, the comedia, during two phases of his career.
Melveena McKendrick writes that Cervantes’s two early surviving plays,
La destrucción de Numancia and El trato de Argel, were influenced by the
plays of Lope de Rueda, Lupercio Leonardo de Argensola, and Cristobal
de Virués.52 The canon of Toledo makes favourable mention of three of
Argensola’s plays in Don Quixote, praising them along with Cervantes’s
own Numancia.53 While Cervantes’s relationship to Lope de Vega
approaches nearer to rivalry than admiration, Cervantes’s later plays
reflect many of the characteristics Lope defined as part of the comedia
nueva, including a three-act structure and a loose take on the
neoclassical dramatic unities of time, place, and action.54 Cervantes
does not adapt Lope’s precepts without question; Gerli characterizes
Cervantes’s El retablo de las maravillas as an ‘intertextual commentary
on the state of contemporary drama’ in which he refutes the arguments
of Lope’s 1609 poem Arte nuevo de hacer comedias.55
European Sources
Like many other writers of the Spanish Golden Age, Cervantes travelled
to Italy, where he came into contact with the literature and culture of
the Italian Renaissance.56 Cervantes’s career as a soldier took him to
Rome by 1569, and he could almost certainly read Italian.57 Cervantes’s
literary works evoke the most famous Italian writers from the medieval
and Renaissance periods, including Dante, Petrarch, Boccaccio, and
others, as well as visual artists such as Raphael, through intertextual
borrowings large and small.58 De Armas points out that the Italy
Cervantes encountered was not the brilliant Italy of the first flowering
of early modern humanism and classicism. The legacy of the sack of
Rome in 1527 and Counter-Reformation ideology had made conditions
for art and literature more difficult; both in Italy and in Cervantes’s
native Spain, the late sixteenth century brought ‘the end of an age of
significant spiritual freedom and moral autonomy’.59 De Armas
characterizes Cervantes’s Italian borrowings as ‘in part a desire for the
return of the Renaissance’.60
Foundational both for imagining the Catholic cosmos and for forging
a literary Italian language, Dante Alighieri’s Commedia became the text
of reference for Italian literature, attracting both commentary and
imitation. Fernando Cervantes argues that the balance of Christian
themes and Classical mythology in Cervantes’s work, especially Don
Quixote, owes a debt to Dante’s treatment of figures like Virgil, the
poet’s guide through Inferno.61 Fernando Cervantes points to a Dante-
inspired conversation between Don Quixote and Sancho about whether
the valiant knights of the past are in heaven or in hell, which Américo
Castro likewise finds to be a citation of Dante.62 Bandera compares the
use of Amadís de Gaula in the love affair of Cardenio and Luscinda to
Dante’s characterization of the Prose Lancelot as the enticement that led
doomed lovers Francesca and Paolo to sin.63 At Grisóstomo’s funeral,
the student-shepherd’s friend Ambrosio remarks that Grisóstomo has
been struck down ‘en la mitad de la carrera de su vida’ [‘in the middle
of his life’], paraphrasing the first line of the Commedia.64 Don
Quixote’s descent to the underworld in the cave of Montesinos episode
likewise reflects Dante’s journey among the dead, though in that case
Cervantes blends the Dante reference with borrowings from other texts.
Altisidora’s vision of the underworld, however feigned, echoes Dante in
that it depicts an eternal punishment that relies on poetic justice, in
this case not for a bad person, but for a bad book, namely the
apocryphal sequel to Don Quixote, Part I by Alonso Fernández de
Avellaneda.65 Avellaneda offended Cervantes by presuming to write his
own sequel to Cervantes’s work, and in retribution, Cervantes places
that book in an infernal setting. Dante’s Inferno famously features many
historical personae, including Filippo Argenti and Farinata degli Uberti,
who wronged the author or his ancestors.
Cervantes’s short lyric poetry, interpolated into Galatea, Don Quixote,
Persiles, and Novelas ejemplares, reflects the influence of Francesco
Petrarca. Petrarca’s Rime Sparse, also known as Il canzoniere, comprises
a series of sonnets, canzoni, and other short lyric poems that reflect on
the poetic speaker’s connection with the ethereal Laura. Vickers
describes how Petrarca’s poems ‘scattered’ the poetic mistress’s body,
describing and celebrating it in pieces and thus denying subjectivity to
Laura herself.66 The blazon, the catalogue and praise of a woman’s
features part by part, became one of the most transferable Petrarchan
motifs. Petrarca’s lyric poems have an elegiac as well as an erotic
dimension; the reader learns that Laura has died halfway through the
series, and certain poems memorialize the dead, both Laura and others.
Among the famous imitators of the Petrarchan sonnet rank English
courtier Thomas Wyatt, the Pléiade school of French poets including
Pierre de Ronsard and Joachim du Bellay, and Spanish poets Garcilaso
de la Vega and Juan Boscán.67 Cervantes approaches the style and
mood of Petrarca in Grisóstomo’s funeral poem as well as the sonnets
he interpolates into prose texts. Cervantes’s debt to Petrarchism is
filtered through that of other Spanish poets, notably Garcilaso, whom
Cervantes admires. Yet Cervantes’s adaptation of Petrarchan trope is
not always reverent. Don Quixote offers a parodic blazon of Dulcinea
that exposes and critiques the objectification of women inherent in
Petrarchism:
sus cabellos son oro, su frente campos elíseos, sus cejas arcos del cielo,
sus ojos soles, sus mejillas rosas, sus labios corales, perlas sus dientes,
alabastro su cuello, mármol su pecho, marfil sus manos, su blancura
nieve, y las partes que a la vista humana encubrió la honestidad son
tales…que solo la discreta consideración puede encarecerlas, y no
compararlas.
[her tresses are gold, her forehead Elysian fields, her eyebrows the
arches of heaven, her eyes suns, her cheeks roses, her lips coral, her
teeth pearls, her neck alabaster, her bosom marble, her hands ivory, her
skin white as snow, and the parts that modesty hides from human eyes
are such…that the most discerning consideration can only praise them
but not compare them.]68
Quixote breaks Petrarchan decorum by sexualizing Dulcinea’s body,
and he trivializes the Petrarchan mode of description by piling together
clichéd metaphors that, taken together, read as hollow and grotesque.
Though Cervantes’s works always invoke other writers as intertexts,
in the prologue to Novelas ejemplares he claims that his stories are
entirely original: ‘[É]stas son mías propias, no imitadas ni hurtadas’
[‘These are my own, neither imitated nor stolen’].69 Cervantes’s
exemplary novels are neither translations nor copies, but they
nonetheless exist within the genre codes of the medieval and early
modern Italian novella as defined by the work of Giovanni Boccaccio.
Boccaccio, who wrote both in Latin and the vernacular, influenced
many early modern Spanish prose genres; his defence of women De
mulieribus claris (1374) found an echo in Antonio de Guevara’s Relox de
príncipes (1529), and Alfonso Martínez de Toledo imitated Boccaccio’s
misogynistic Il corbaccio (c.1355) in his 1438 sermon and treatise El
corbacho. As mentioned above, the Elegia de madonna Fiammetta left its
mark on the Iberian sentimental novel.
Boccaccio is best known, however, for the Decameron (c.1353), a
collection of one hundred short stories or novelle that takes for its frame
tale the escape of a group of ten narrators—seven women and three
men—from the plague in Florence. The young and privileged narrators
retreat to a country house, where they pass the time telling stories on a
theme determined by the appointed king or queen for the day. The
tales are drawn from a variety of genres and range over the whole of
Europe. Some stories are original, while others draw on ancient and
medieval sources. Tales such as that of Alatiel (2.7) place Muslim and
Christian societies into contact and dramatize language barriers. Other
stories, such as that of Frate Cipolla [Friar Onion] (6.10), have a
Tuscan setting and depict religious and other concerns of late medieval
Italian society. Many of Boccaccio’s tales, including the story of Zinevra
(2.9) and the story of the Marchesa di Montferrato (1.9), stage conflicts
between independent-minded women and the men who seek to control
or oppress them, and the battle between the sexes is a frequent source
of banter among the narrators at the opening and closing of story days.
The Boccaccian novelle inspired other story collections both in Italy and
elsewhere. The novelle of Matteo Bandello, Marguerite de Navarre
(Heptaméron, 1588), and Geoffrey Chaucer (The Canterbury Tales), owe
a clear debt to Boccaccio. Boccaccio-inspired Italian novelle also
impacted European theatre; both William Shakespeare (Romeo and
Juliet, 1595) and Lope de Vega (La viuda valenciana, 1620) adapted
novelle by Bandello for the stage.70
Cervantes’s novelas often have a Boccaccian feel. La española inglesa
and El amante liberal range the Mediterranean much in the way that
certain Boccaccian tales do, and the love-intrigues in La señora Cornelia
and Las dos doncellas are reminiscent of those of Italian novelle.
According to Barbara Fuchs, in Cervantes’s representation of Italy, the
influence of the Italian Renaissance on Spain, and the imperial
relationship between Spain and the Italian city-states remain in the
background; the Italy of the novelas is a ludic ‘space of desire’ in which
characters evade responsibilities and find adventure.71 For Forcione,
Cervantes in his exemplary novels engages in ‘creative adaptation’,
freely combining the Italianate novella with other models. El celoso
extremeño is the most Boccaccian of the exemplary novels, both in its
action-oriented structure and in its depiction of female entrapment.72 El
casamiento engañoso, which ends abruptly when its feverish protagonist
overhears the chatter of the dogs Cipión and Berganza of El coloquio de
los perros, also bears a close resemblance to Italian models. Carrizales’s
deceitful veiled bride evokes the trope that De Armas terms the
invisible mistress, which travelled to Spain largely through the Italian
novelle of Masuccio and Bandello.73 The invisible mistress is a gender-
reversed version of Apuleius’s Cupid and Psyche that made its first
appearance in medieval Europe in the Old French verse romance
Partonopeus de Blois (c.1185).74 The faint echo of this trope in
Cervantes, which could either have come from the Italian novelle or the
late fifteenth-century translation of Partonopeus that was widely
circulated and reprinted in Spain in the sixteenth century, shows just
how difficult it is to pinpoint Cervantes’s influences.75
Cervantes cites Ludovico Ariosto’s Orlando Furioso (1515) in a much
more direct way than texts by Dante, Petrarch, or Boccaccio. The
Carolingian-themed comic epic is as important a source for the
chivalric material in Don Quixote as Amadís de Gaula. Jerónimo de
Urrea’s Spanish translation of Ariosto appeared in 1548, though
Thomas Hart speculates that many Spaniards, including Cervantes, read
the work in Italian.76 Hart counts more than twenty specific references
to Orlando Furioso in Don Quixote; some are brief citations, and others
borrow from Ariosto at the level of structure or theme.77
Orlando Furioso contains three major plots: pagan king Agramante’s
invasion of France, Orlando’s madness, and Bradamante’s quest for
reunion with her pagan beloved Ruggiero, which culminates in the
latter’s conversion.78 Orlando Furioso continues the story of another
Italian epic themed after the matter of France, Matteo Boiardo’s
Orlando Innamorato (1483–95), which Cervantes also admired;
Cervantes’s play La casa de los celos (1615) imitates Boiardo.79 In both
epics, Angelica, the princess of Cathay, causes disturbance with her
marvellous beauty. In Ariosto, Orlando becomes mad when he realizes
that he has lost Angelica to the moor Medoro. Upon discovering the
evidence of their love affair, Orlando falls prey to blind rage, and he
recovers his wits only when minor character Astolfo flies to the moon
on a hippogriff and retrieves them. Cervantes makes his most overt
borrowing from Orlando Furioso when Don Quixote debates between
Orlando and Amadís as models for his own madness in the Sierra
Morena section of Don Quixote, Part I.80 In El curioso impertinente,
Lotario makes reference to another famous episode of Orlando Furioso,
Rinaldo’s prudent refusal to drink from the goblet that would dribble
when it came into contact with men whose wives had been
unfaithful.81 Also at Juan Palomeque’s inn, the general chaos that
erupts when the Santa Hermandad arrives reminds Don Quixote of ‘la
discordia del campo de Agramante’ [‘the discord of Agramante’s
camp’].82 Perhaps most significantly, Part I of Don Quixote ends with a
paraphrase of Ariosto’s invitation to other writers to continue his work:
‘forsi altro canterà con miglior plectio’ [‘perhaps another will sing in a
better style’].83 Alonso Fernández de Avellaneda’s continuation of Don
Quixote took this allusion too literally, at least for Cervantes’s taste.
Cervantes’s criticism of Avellaneda is perhaps ironic, considering
that in the long poem Viaje del Parnaso, Cervantes undertook an
allegorical journey to the origin of the art of poetry in dialogue with a
contemporary Italian source, Cesare Caporali’s Viaggio di Parnaso
(c.1587). The opening lines of Cervantes’s poem summarize Caporali’s
text: ‘Un quidam Caporal italiano / de patria perusino, a lo que
entiendo / De ingenio griego y de valor romano / Llevado de un
capricho reverendo / Le vino en voluntad de ir a Parnaso’ [‘A certain
Caporali, an Italian of Perugia as I understand, Greek in his intellect
and Roman in his courage, went to Parnassus on a whim’].84
Cervantes’s opening reflects his characteristic ambivalence. While
Rivers describes Cervantes’s relationship to his source as ironic,
Lamberti argues that Cervantes admired Caporali’s poem.85 Cervantes
adapts the basic structure of Caporali’s Viaggio, having the poetic
speaker abandon his homeland and journey by ship to the Greek
mountain that was the mythological home of the muses.86 As Lamberti
points out, Cervantes replaces Caporali’s merchant vessels with an
allegorical ship, captained by the god Mercury, composed entirely of
verses.87 At Parnassus, Caporali’s speaker meets with the goddess
Licenza Poetica [Poetic License] and speaks of great literary figures from
the Italian past, including Dante, Petrarch, Boccaccio, and Pietro
Bembo.88 Caporali’s poem also criticizes the bad poets who aspire to
greatness in vain.89 Cervantes’s treatment of the theme is more
extensive, as is his catalogue of good and bad poets. Spanish poets fill
Mercury’s ship, and once at Parnassus, they engage in battle with
literary pretenders. As in Caporali’s poem, Cervantes’s poetic speaker
meets with the goddess who incarnates poetry, but in Cervantes, the
emphasis is on contemporary Spanish poets rather than poetry itself.
Cervantes’s borrowings from Italian writers, as from literary models
in general, tend to be diffuse, dissembled, and mediated by the
influence of intervening texts. In some cases, the precise vector an
intertext takes to reach Cervantes is unknown. Influences are
particularly difficult to track in the realms of politics and philosophy.
For example, Niccoló Machiavelli’s The Prince (1532), though banned in
Spain, impacted Cervantes’s depiction of politics in Don Quixote, Part II
either directly or indirectly. Cascardi states that ‘Machiavelli’s texts
were officially banned in Spain, but his ideas were known, and
“substitute” texts were found’.90 Cascardi reads Sancho’s governorship
of the false island of Barataria as a ‘serio-comic twist’ on Machiavelli’s
advice for nonhereditary rulers who newly acquire kingdoms.91
Likewise, Cervantes owes a direct or indirect debt to Erasmus and other
humanists, including Catalonian scholar Juan Luis Vives. Castro
famously writes: ‘without Erasmus, Cervantes would not have been as
he was’.92 Despite many instances of what Forcione terms ‘natural
affinities’ between the work of Cervantes and that of Erasmus of
Rotterdam, it is difficult to determine exactly which Erasmian texts
Cervantes read, admired, or experienced through a mediating text.93
Erasmus wrote letters and treatises addressing a variety of aspects of
ordinary human life, and it is in this respect that his version of
humanism comes closest to Cervantes’s own vision. For Forcione,
Erasmus is a champion of the bourgeoisie and of lay life, and his most
famous texts are oriented toward ‘the charitable Christian, the
concerned citizen, the responsible family head, and the good friend’.94
Forcione finds connections among Cervantes’s exemplary novels and
Erasmus’s writings on marriage. Erasmus’s 1518 Encomium Matrimonii
[Declamation on the Praise of Marriage] shares with Cervantes’s La
gitanilla the notion that marriage can lead to spiritual fulfilment for
husbands and wives.95 Cascardi finds echoes of Erasmus’s anti-clerical
In Praise of Folly in many Cervantine texts, including Don Quixote, El
licenciado vidriera, and El coloquio de los perros.96 For Cascardi, these
texts draw inspiration from the ‘paradox’ of In Praise of Folly, ‘that folly
should speak the truth’.97 According to Cascardi, Cervantes found in the
influence of Erasmus useful tools for speaking truth while avoiding
censorship, which is ironic considering that Eramus’s writings were
censored by the Council of Trent. Cervantes might also have drawn
inspiration from the works of other humanists. For both Cascardi and
Diana de Armas Wilson, Sancho’s false island of Barataria, in Don
Quixote, Part II, echoes Thomas More’s Utopia (1516), which was not
translated into Spanish until 1637, but which would likely have
circulated in Spain in its original Latin.98 For Garst-Santos, Dorotea’s
description of her daily life and employments in Don Quixote, Part I
draws on the conduct tradition, particularly Catalonian humanist Juan
Luis Vives’s 1523 Education of a Christian Woman.99 Both More and
Vives were part of Erasmus’s circle of correspondents, and their work in
Latin would have been available to a wide range of European scholars
and writers, potentially including Cervantes.
Classical Sources
For writers of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, classical
antiquity represents literary authority, and Cervantes is no exception to
this trend. E.C. Riley explains that ‘in the poetic theory of the
Renaissance, as in Antiquity, the imitation of models was scarcely less
important than the imitation of nature…[w]riters were told that they
should seek to improve upon their models, imitate only what was
excellent, choose according to their needs and imitate appropriately’.100
Cervantes expresses both the obligation for classicism and his
ambivalence about authority in his dialogue with the amigo in the
prologue to Don Quixote, Part I. The author complains to his friend:
ni tengo qué acotar en el margen, ni qué anotar en el fin, ni menos sé
qué autores sigo en él, para ponerlos al principio, como hacen todos,
comenzando en Aristóteles y acabando en Xenofonte y en Zoilo o
Zeuxis, aunque fue maldiciente el uno y pintor el otro…naturalmente
soy poltrón y perezoso de andarme buscando autores que digan lo que
yo me sé decir sin ellos.
[I have nothing to note in the margin or annotate at the end, and I
certainly don’t know which authors I have followed so that I can
mention them at the beginning, as everyone else does, beginning with
Aristotle and ending with Xenophon, and with Zoilus and Zeuxis,
though one was a slanderer and the other a painter…I am by nature too
lazy and slothful to go looking for authors to say what I know how to
say without them.]101
The amigo recommends that the author supply the required apparatus
by citing ‘algunas sentencias o latines que vos sepáis de memoria, o a lo
menos, que os cuesten poco trabajo el buscalle’ [‘some appropriate
maxims or phrases in Latin, ones that you know by heart, or at least,
that won’t cost you too much trouble to look up’].102 The amigo’s
comment is meant to criticize spurious citation; according to Riley,
Cervantes opposed ‘indiscriminate borrowing’.103 The prologue to Don
Quixote, Part I brings into relief the tension Cervantes perceived
between his original writing, full of ‘pensamientos varios y nunca
imaginados de otro alguno’ [‘inconstant thoughts never imagined by
anyone else’], and the authoritative model of authorship he inherited
from classical, medieval, and early modern practice.104 Cervantes cites
classical sources, but he also pushes against them and shapes them to
his own purposes, undoing in some measure their status as authority.
Critics have amply discussed Cervantes’s literary theory in
relationship to the prevailing Neo-Platonic and Neo-Aristotelian ideas
from the early modern period. Sixteenth-century textual rediscoveries
of Plato and Aristotle led to a theoretical reformulation of how
literature should represent life and relate to its reading public.105
Plato’s Republic famously excludes poets from the state on account of
the unseemly passions their work may excite, and Aristotle’s Poetics
argues for unity and verisimilitude as the guiding principles of good
literature.106 As with many of his classical influences, Cervantes most
likely accessed the ideas of Plato and Aristotle through mediating early
modern sources. According to Frederick A. de Armas, the Neo-Platonic
ideas of León Ebreo (Dialogues of Love, 1530) and Baldassare
Castiglione (The Book of the Courtier, 1528) were a fundamental
influence on Cervantes’s notions of ‘love, nature, and beauty’ in La
Galatea.107 For Cascardi, Erasmus’s The Education of the Christian Prince
(1516) may have provided ‘a conduit for Plato’s ideas, even if
Cervantes did not learn them from Plato’s texts directly’.108 Riley notes
that Cervantes’s knowledge of Aristotle’s Poetics, not available in
Spanish translation until 1626, may have been filtered through López
Pinciano’s 1596 Philosofía Antigua Poética.109
Torquato Tasso, a contemporary of Cervantes, a Neo-Aristotelian
literary theorist, and the author of the epic poem Gerusalemme Liberata
(1581), looked to classical models in order to improve upon medieval
and early modern fiction. Though a connection cannot be proven, it is
possible that Tasso’s Discourses on the Heroic Poem (1594) influenced
Cervantes.110 Cervantes mentions Tasso and Gerusalemme Liberata in
Persiles, in which Tasso appears painted in a panel depicting poets of
the future.111 Moreover, the play La conquista de Jerúsalen por Godofré
de Bullón, attributed to Cervantes, adapts Tasso’s epic. Stefano Arata
dates La conquista de Jerúsalen to 1581–5, which would make it the
earliest Spanish adaptation of Tasso. Arata and Kahn argue that
Cervantes is the author of the play based on its structural and linguistic
features.112 Like Tasso, Cervantes struggles in Don Quixote to reconcile
the out-of-favour romance of chivalry with Neo-Aristotelian values. For
Cascardi, the conversation among the canon of Toledo, the priest, and
Don Quixote references the search in classical texts for ‘normative
guidelines that could be used to regulate contemporary literary
practice’.113 According to Forcione, ‘Cervantes was deeply attracted to
the free fantasies of medieval romance, which he knew to be an
outmoded literary genre. At the same time he conceived of the new
possibility of a genre that would retain the appeal of the romances and,
by its observance of Aristotelian rules, meet the demands of
contemporary literary tastes’.114 Many Cervantine texts, including Don
Quixote and El coloquio de los perros, resist the normalizing pressure of
Aristotelian guidelines, particularly the need for verisimilitude, but
Cervantes largely accedes to prevailing literary fashion in Persiles, his
final prose work.
For Tasso and others, ancient epic provided the most prestigious
model for early modern fiction. While Homer and Virgil depicted
events that did not conform to strict notions of verisimilitude, such as
the intervention of gods and the utterance of prophecy, early modern
literary theorists, particularly Tasso, attempted to reconcile the
marvellous dimensions of epic with Aristotelian verisimilitude.115
Cervantes likewise admires ancient epic, and he makes extensive
reference to Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey and Virgil’s Aeneid in Don
Quixote, Parts I and II. McGaha argues that Virgil is Cervantes’s primary
textual model, even though Cervantes’s debt to chivalry is more readily
evident.116 Citing Arturo Marasso, McGaha writes that ‘Cervantes was
familiar not only with the Latin text of the Aeneid but with both
sixteenth-century Spanish translations of the work: that of Gregorio
Hernández de Velasco (1555) and that of Diego López (1600)’.117
According to McGaha, Cervantes sought to improve upon The Aeneid
‘by eliminating the flaws in Virgil’s work that had diminished its
credibility: the reliance on magic and divine machinery’.118 The epics
of Homer influenced Cervantes as well, though the connection is
indirect. According to De Armas, limited diffusion of ancient Greek in
Spain meant that most writers, including Cervantes, approached the
Iliad 
and 
the 
Odyssey 
through 
‘translations, 
summaries, 
and
adaptations’.119
In Don Quixote, Part I, characters and personae from classical epic
appear as frequent points of reference. At Grisóstomo’s funeral, Vivaldo
argues against destroying the student-shepherd’s poetry with a
reference to Virgil: ‘no le tuviera bueno Augusto César si consintiera
que se pusiera en acción lo que el divino Mantuano dejó en su
testamento mandado’ [‘You would not think so highly of Caesar
Augustus if he had agreed to carry out what the divine Mantuan had
ordered in his will’].120 McGaha reads the night of terror Quixote and
Sancho spend in I.21 as an imitation of the night Aeneas and his
company spent listening to the eruptions of Mount Etna in Book III of
the Aeneid. Cervantes rewrites this episode with irony: ‘[w]hen morning
came, Aeneas found that his fears were amply justified, for he was in
the dangerous land of the Cyclops. Don Quixote, on the other hand,
was humiliated to discover that the source of the noise was six fulling
hammers’.121 The canon of Toledo, usually an enemy of chivalry,
admires the chivalric writer’s freedom to create characters who
combine the salient traits of the personae of epic, including ‘las astucias
de Ulixes, la piedad de Aeneas, la valentía de Aquiles, las desgracias de
Héctor, las traiciones de Sinon, la amistad de Eurialio’ [‘the guile of
Ulysses, the piety of Aeneas, the valor of Achilles, the misfortunes of
Hector, the treachery of Sinon, the friendship of Euryalus’].122 At Juan
Palomeque’s inn in Part I, Luis includes a reference to Palinurus, the
pilot of Aeneas’s ship, in his song to Clara: ‘Siguiendo voy a una estrella
/ que desde lejos descubro / más bella y resplandesciente / que cuantas
vio Palinuro’ [‘Guided by a distant star / more radiant, more bright /
though its light shines from afar / than any Palinurus spied]’.123
Palinurus, fated to die in the Aeneid, became in early modern literature
a stock image of the competent navigator. Also in Part I, Don Quixote
references ‘la robada Elena’ [‘the abducted Helen’], whom he compares
unfavourably to Dulcinea.124 He reiterates the comparison when he
writes a letter for Dulcinea: ‘ni la llega Elena, ni la alcanza Lucrecia, ni
otra alguna de las famosas mujeres de la edad pretérita, griega, bárbara
o latina’ [‘Helen cannot approach her, Lucrezia cannot match her, nor
can any of the other famous women of past ages, Greek, barbarian, or
Latin’].125
In Part II of Don Quixote, Helen appears alongside Virgil’s Dido in
tapestries displayed at an inn.126 Hart reads this episode as an explicit
imitation of Virgil, meant to recall Aeneas reading the story of the
Trojan War in the friezes of the temple in Dido’s Carthage.127 McGaha
argues that the ekphrasis in Aeneid, Book I ‘inspire[d] the ingenious
idea of making the 1605 Don Quixote an important literary element in
the 1615 novel—as in the case of Odysseus and Aeneas, Don Quixote’s
fame will precede him, causing the other characters to compare the
“real” Don Quixote with his literary representation’.128 McGaha also
discusses Camacho’s wedding as a version of the games in Book V of
the Aeneid and Don Quixote’s extended visit with the Duke and Duchess
as an imitation of Aeneas’s stay in Carthage.129 Giuseppe Mazzotta
points out that Cervantes uses an ‘epic catalogue’ to link Clavileño, the
wooden horse the Duke and Duchess insist the protagonists ride, to
famous horses of the past, including the Trojan horse.130 For Mazzotta,
the Clavileño episode is not just a straightforward reference to epic;
Sancho’s imagined journey to the stars also imitates ‘visionary flights’
in sources from ancient to modern, including those in Plato, Cicero,
Lucian, and Dante.131 Mazzotta interprets the episode in connection
with Leo Spitzer’s discussion of perspectivism, an aesthetics of
‘composing and fitting disparate things together’.132 The cave of
Montesinos, also in Don Quixote, Part II, likewise mixes classical,
medieval, and early modern models, recalling instances of katábasis, or
the descent to the underworld, in Homer’s Odyssey, Virgil’s Aeneid,
Dante’s Commedia, and, as Mazzotta argues, Boiardo’s Orlando
Innamorato.133
Cervantes’s Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda has an even more
explicit connection to its classical source than does Don Quixote. Persiles
participates in an international vogue for Heliodorus’s Aethiopica
[Ethiopian History] in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,
especially among humanists.134 The Greek romance, which dates from
the third or fourth century ad, was rediscovered in 1526 in the library
of King Matthias Corvinus of Hungary and published in Greek in
1534.135 Aethiopica was translated into French in 1547, Spanish in
1554, and Italian in 1556, and it soon became the target of many
literary imitations.136 According to David Boruchoff, part of the reason
for the popularity of Aethiopica as a model was its perceived moral
superiority to medieval and early modern fictional genres.137 Alban
Forcione notes that Neo-Aristotelians appreciated it for its perceived
verisimilitude.138
Though the events of Aethiopica seemed plausible to early modern
readers, twenty-first century readers would not necessarily recognize
them as such. Heliodorus’s prose work chronicles the journey of star-
crossed lovers Chariclea and Theagenes, who narrowly escape disaster
at each turn of the convoluted plot. Amid successive instances of
captivity, the preternaturally attractive young people meet a cast of
minor characters who spontaneously declare their life stories. As
Stanislav Zimic points out, Cervantes echoes these Heliodoran
interpolated autobiographies in the narratives of Cardenio and Dorotea
in Don Quixote, Part I; for Zimic, Cervantes adapts ‘the tendency of
Byzantine characters to confess their most intimate problems’.139
Cervantes’s Novelas ejemplares, Galatea, and Persiles also use Heliodoran
interpolation strategies, having new characters announce themselves by
name and origin and declare a portion of their life story, regardless of
its relevance to other narrative events.140
Aethiopica begins in medias res, with the capture by pirates;
Cervantes adapts this strategy for Persiles, placing the reader into the
scene of the barbarians’ cruel imprisonment of Auristela. Cervantes
builds the plot of Persiles upon Heliodoran tropes of reversal of fortune,
cross-cultural contact, maritime travel, and chance meeting. Periandro/
Persiles and Auristela/Sigismunda, like Theagenes and Chariclea,
assume false identities and pretend to be brother and sister. Also like
their Heliodoran counterparts, the Cervantine protagonists maintain a
chaste relationship until their journey is done. Cervantes gives Auristela
a religious motive for wandering; her goal is a pilgrimage to Rome, and
Periandro’s task is to accompany her. The setting differs from
Heliodorus primarily in latitude. Persiles takes place in a quasi-
imaginary Northern Europe, featuring characters from the frozen isles
in and around Norway. The description of the northern barbarians,
especially their cannibalism, bears greater resemblance to accounts of
the New World than to Heliodorus.141 Periandro and Auristela also
make an extended stop at the more rationally governed island of
Policarpo, which owes a possible debt to Thomas More’s Utopia.
Like his use of Virgil and Heliodorus, Cervantes’s references to
Roman poet Ovid reflect direct contact with the ancient author’s work.
Both Rudolph Schevill and De Armas note the popularity of Ovid,
particularly the Metamorphoses, in early modern Spain; there were at
least eight Spanish translations of the work.142 The Metamorphoses (c.8
AD) is a long narrative poem that serves as a compendium of Greco-
Roman legends, each presented with the connecting device of
transformation. In each story, the gods cause the characters to change
forms, shifting from human into animal, plant, or landscape. Worden
argues that Ovid’s Metamorphoses provides a secondary organizing
device within Don Quixote, Parts I and II: ‘like the Metamorphoses,
Cervantes’s novel depicts transformations of all kinds’.143 For Worden,
Don Quixote, Sancho, and Aldonza/Dulcinea undergo ‘dubious’
metamorphoses when they take on their new identities, and the reader
must decide whether these changes are real or false.144 Cervantes
makes many direct references to Ovid in Don Quixote. In Part I,
Cardenio compares his ill-fated love affair with Luscinda to that of
Ovid’s Pyramus and Thisbe: ‘al padre de Luscinda le pareció que por
buenos respetos estaba obligado a negarme la entrada de su casa, casi
imitando en esto a los padres de aquella Tisbe tan decantada de los
poetas’ [‘it seemed to Luscinda’s father that, in deference to public
opinion, he was obliged to deny me entry to his house, almost imitating
in this regard the parents of that same Thisbe praised so often by
poets’].145 The epistolary components of Cardenio and Luscinda’s love
affair may also owe to another Ovidian text, Heroides, which presents
letters from women of myth and legend expressing their sorrow over
events that are best known from the perspective of men.146 In Part II,
the knight’s guide to the Cave of Montesinos declares himself to be
working on a book entitled the Metamorfoseos, or the Ovidio español.147
Cervantes’s debt to classical sources in Don Quixote is both diffuse
and ambivalent, and Cervantes often reads sources against each other
for critical purposes. Cervantes’s early play La destrucción de Numancia
depends on a similar conflation of classical models. Numancia tells a
‘double story’ of the fall of the Celtiberian city in the second century
ad, chronicling both the frustrations of the invading Romans and the
increasing desperation inside the besieged city.148 De Armas argues that
Cervantes grounds Numancia in a complex web of imitations of Homer,
Virgil, Lucan, and other classical authorities.149 Cervantes’s primary
historical source for the play is Antonio de Morales’s Crónica general de
España (1574) in which he would have found citations of ancient
sources.150 De Armas writes that the play’s references to Homer are
most likely filtered through medieval texts on Trojan themes, such as
the Crónica troyana (1490), which in their turn drew on Latin romances
by Dictis and Dares.151 According to De Armas, Cervantes uses Homer
to develop his concept of heroism, opposing the technique of cunning,
associated with Homer’s Odysseus, to the virtue of bravery, associated
with Greek hero Achilles. In Cervantes’s play, the Roman invaders play
the role of the clever Greeks, starving the city slowly to death instead
of meeting them in battle.152 The Homeric imitation thus suggests
Numantian superiority. However, Cervantes’s evocation of Virgil’s
Aeneid places that alignment in doubt; the play represents Spain,
through the Romans, as the perhaps ironic inheritor of the Roman
programme of empire. The play thus serves a function similar to the
Aeneid as a foundational myth.
Complicating matters even further is Numancia’s imitation of Lucan’s
Pharsalia (65 AD), an epic in an alternate tradition that David Quint
identifies as aligned with the interests of the defeated party.153
Numancia shares with Lucan’s Pharsalia a divided plot, the depiction of
necromancy, and the trope of the epic curse, uttered by a member of
the losing side to undermine the triumph of the winners.154 Cervantes
uses his confluence of classical sources to reinforce the play’s
ambivalence about the foundational myth it creates. According to
Aaron M. Kahn, Numancia can be read both as ‘propaganda’ for the
Spanish imperial project and as a statement of the ‘injustice of
tyrannical imperialism’.155
Critical opinion varies on the relative importance and precise
meaning of Cervantes’s catalogue of sources in Spanish, European, and
classical literature. Many genres—classical epic, medieval romance, or
humanist discourse—could be said to provide Cervantes’s guiding
principle. Cervantes places his intertexts into conversation with each
other, but he declares no stable allegiance. The indeterminate nature of
Cervantes’s poetics of citation, his irony and his ambivalence,
constitutes the originality of his work. The modernity of Cervantes,
especially as twenty-first century readers perceive it, depends on an
interconnected program of citation that follows no fixed rule and pays
little respect to notions of authority and tradition.
Works Cited
Aladro-Font, Jorge, and Ricardo Ramos Tremolada. ‘Ausencia y presencia de
Garcilaso en el Quijote’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America
16, no. 2 (1996): 89–106.
Alighieri, Dante. The Divine Comedy of Dante Alighieri: Inferno, edited and
translated by Robert M. Durling (New York: Oxford UP, 1996).
Anonymous. Partonopeu de Blois, edited by Olivier Collet and Pierre-Marie Joris
(Paris: Le Livre de Poche, 2005).
Arata, Stefano. ‘La conquista de Jerusalén, Cervantes y la generación teatral de
1580’. Criticón 54 (1992): pp. 9–112.
Avalle-Arce, Juan Bautista. ‘Cervantes and the Renaissance’. In Cervantes and the
Renaissance, edited by Michael McGaha (Easton: Juan de la Cuesta, 1980), pp.
1–10.
Avalle-Arce, Juan Bautista. El Amadís primitivo y el de Montalvo (México: Fondo
de Cultura Económica, 1990).
Avalle-Arce, Juan Bautista. La novela pastoril española (Madrid, Revista de
Occidente, 1959).
Bakhtin, M. M. The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays, edited by Michael Holquist
(Austin: University of Texas Press, 1981).
Bandera, Cesáreo. Mimesis conflictiva (Madrid: Editorial Gredos, 1975).
Boruchoff, David A. ‘“Competir con Heliodoro”: Cervantes y la crítica ante una
leyenda’. In USA Cervantes: 39 Cervantistas en Estados Unidos, edited by
Georgina Dopico Black and Francisco Layna Ranz (Madrid: Ediciones
Polifemo, 2009), pp. 181–210.
Brownlee, Marina Scordilis. The Severed Word: Ovid’s Heroides and the Novela
Sentimental (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990).
Canavaggio, Jean. Cervantes, translated by Mauro Armiño, 2nd edition
(Barcelona: Espasa-Calpe, 1997).
Caporali, Cesari. Rime di Cesare Caporali perugino dilegentemente corrette, colle
osservazioni di Carlo Caporali (Perugia: Mario Riginaldi, 1776).
Cascardi, Anthony J. Cervantes, Literature, and the Discourse of Politics (Toronto:
U of Toronto P, 2012).
Castro, Américo. El pensamiento de Cervantes (Barcelona: Noguer, 1973).
Cervantes, Fernando. ‘Cervantes in Italy: Christian Humanism and the Visual
Impact of Renaissance Rome’. Journal of the History of Ideas 66 (2005): 325–
50.
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Don Quixote, translated by Edith Grossman
(New York: Harper Collins, 2003).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. El ingenioso hidalgo don Quijote de la Mancha,
edited by L. A. Murillo, 2 vols. (Madrid: Castalia, 1978).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. La Galatea, edited by Francisco López Estrada
and María López García-Berdoy (Madrid: Cátedra, 1999).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda, edited by
Carlos Romero Muñoz (Madrid: Cátedra, 2004).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Novelas ejemplares, edited by Harry Sieber, 2
vols. (Madrid: Cátedra, 2009).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Viaje del Parnaso, edited by Miguel Herrero
García, revised by Abraham Madroñal (Madrid: Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas, 2016).
Cravens, Sydney. ‘Feliciano de Silva and His Romances of Chivalry in Don
Quijote’. INTI 7 (1998): pp. 28–34.
Cruz, Anne J. Discourses of Poverty: Social Reform and the Picaresque Novel in
Early Modern Spain (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1999).
De Armas, Frederick A. ‘Captured in Ekphrasis: Cervantes and Ovid’. In
Approaches to Teaching the Works of Ovid and the Ovidian Tradition, edited by
Barbara Weiden Boyd and Cora Fox (New York: Modern Language
Association of America, 2010), pp. 241–9.
De Armas, Frederick A. ‘Cervantes and the Italian Renaissance’. In Cambridge
Companion to Cervantes, edited by Anthony J. Cascardi (Cambridge:
Cambridge UP, 2002), pp. 32–57.
De Armas, Frederick A. Cervantes, Raphael and the Classics (Cambridge:
Cambridge UP, 1998).
De Armas, Frederick A. The Invisible Mistress: Aspects of Feminism and Fantasy in
the Golden Age (Charlottesville: Biblioteca Siglo de Oro, 1976).
Doody, Margaret Anne. The True Story of the Novel (New Brunswick: Rutgers UP,
1996).
Dopico Black, Georgina. ‘Canons Afire: Libraries, Books, and Bodies in Don
Quixote’s Spain’. In Cervantes’s Don Quixote: A Casebook, edited by Roberto
González Echevarría (Oxford: Oxford UP, 2005), pp. 95–124.
Dudley, Edward. ‘“¡O más dura que mármol a mis quexas!” Presencia
intertextual de Garcilaso en La Galatea de Cervantes’. In Literatura y
pensamiento en España: Estudios en honor de Ciriaco Morón Arroyo, edited by
Francisco LaRubia-Prado (Newark: Juan de la Cuesta, 2003), pp. 15–32.
Eisenberg, Daniel. Romances of Chivalry in the Spanish Golden Age (Newark: Juan
de la Cuesta, 1982).
Forcione, Alban K. Cervantes and the Humanist Vision: A Study of Four Exemplary
Novels (Princeton: Princeton UP, 1982).
Forcione, Alban K. Cervantes, Aristotle, and the Persiles (Princeton: Princeton UP,
1970).
Fuchs, Barbara. ‘“A Italia la pluma”: Ironia e imperio en las Novelas ejemplares’.
In USA Cervantes: 39 Cervantistas en Estados Unidos, edited by Georgina
Dopico Black and Francisco Layna Ranz (Madrid: Ediciones Polifemo, 2009),
pp. 517–34.
Garcilaso de la Vega. Obra poética y textos en prosa, edited by Bienvenido Morros
(Barcelona: Crítica, 1995).
Garst-Santos, Christine. ‘Dorotea’s Displacement: Performing the Possible in
Early Modern Spain’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 31,
no.2 (2011): pp. 51–84.
Gerli, E. Michael. Refiguring Authority: Reading, Writing, and Rewriting in
Cervantes (Lexington: UP of Kentucky, 1995).
Girard, René. Deceit, Desire, and the Novel, translated by Yvonne Freccero
(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 1965).
Harney, Michael. ‘The Spanish Lancelot-Grail Heritage’. In A Companion to the
Lancelot-Grail Cycle, edited by Carol Dover (Cambridge: D.S. Brewer, 2003),
pp. 185–94.
Hart, Thomas R. Cervantes and Ariosto: Renewing Fiction (Princeton: Princeton
UP, 1989).
Hernández-Pecoraro, Rosilie. Bucolic Metaphors: History, Subjectivity, and Gender
in the Early Modern Spanish Pastoral (Chapel Hill: U of North Carolina P,
2006).
Kahn, Aaron M. ‘Even Further Towards a Theory of Attribution: Advancing the
Cervantine Attribution of La conquista de Jerusalén por Godofre de Bullón’.
Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 33, no.1 (2013): pp. 133–
65.
Kahn, Aaron M. The Ambivalence of Imperial Discourse: Cervantes’s La Numancia
within the ‘Lost Generation’ of Spanish Drama (1570-90) (Oxford: Peter Lang,
2008).
Kahn, Aaron M. ‘Towards a Theory of Attribution: Is La conquista de Jerusalén by
Miguel de Cervantes?’ Journal of European Studies 40, no.2 (2010): pp. 99–
128.
Lamberti, Mariapia. ‘“Un quídam Caporal italiano.” Relaciones del Viaje del
Parnaso de Cervantes con los antecedentes italianos’. Cuadernos AISPI 5
(2015): pp. 97–116.
Lida de Malkiel, María Rosa. ‘Arthurian Literature in Spain and Portugal’. In
Arthurian Literature in the Middle Ages: A Collaborative History, edited by Roger
Sherman Loomis (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1959), pp. 405–18.
Lukács, Georg. The Theory of the Novel, translated by Anna Bostock (Cambridge:
The M.I.T. Press, 1971).
Mancing, Howard. The Chivalric World of Don Quijote: Style, Structure, and
Narrative Technique (Columbia: University of Missouri Press, 1982).
Mazzotta, Giuseppe. Cosmopoesis: The Renaissance Experiment (Toronto: U of
Toronto P, 2001).
McGaha, Michael. ‘Cervantes and Virgil’. In Cervantes and the Renaissance,
edited by McGaha (Easton: Juan de la Cuesta, 1980), pp. 34–50.
McKendrick, Melveena. Theatre in Spain, 1490-1700 (Cambridge: Cambridge UP,
1989).
Monzó, Clara, editor. ‘El Conde Partinuplés: Transcripción’. Tirant 16 (2013):
pp. 409–68.
Muñoz Sánchez, Juan Ramón, ‘«Los vírgenes esposos del Persiles»: el episodio
de Renato y Eusebia’. Anales Cervantinos XL (2008): pp. 205–28.
Navarrete, Ignacio. Orphans of Petrarch: Poetry and Theory in the Spanish
Renaissance (Berkeley: U of California P, 1994).
Quint, David. Cervantes’s Novel of Modern Times: A New Reading of Don Quijote
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003).
Quint, David. Epic and Empire: Politics and Generic Form from Virgil to Milton
(Princeton: Princeton UP, 1992).
Quint, David. Origin and Originality in Renaissance Literature (New Haven and
London: Yale University Press, 1983).
Rico, Francisco. Problemas del Lazarillo (Madrid: Cátedra, 1988).
Riley, E.C. Cervantes’s Theory of the Novel (Oxford: Clarendon, 1962).
Rivers, Elias L. ‘Cervantes’s Journey to Parnassus’. MLN 85 (1970): pp. 243–8.
Rothstein, Marian. Reading in the Renaissance: Amadis de Gaule and the Lessons
of Memory (Newark: U of Delaware P, 1999).
Sales Dasí, Emilio José. ‘Las continuaciones heterodoxas (el Florisando [1510]
de Páez de Ribera y el Lisuarte de Grecia [1526] de Juan Díaz) y ortodoxas
(el Lisuarte de Grecia [1514] y el Amadís de Grecia [1530] de Feliciano de
Silva) del Amadís de Gaula’. Edad de Oro 21 (2002): pp. 117–52.
Schevill, Rudolph. ‘Ovid and the Renaissance in Spain’, edited. by Charles M.
Gayley, H.K. Schilling, and Rudolph Schevill. University of California
Publications in Modern Philology 4 (1913): pp. 1–268.
Severin, Dorothy S. ‘Diego de San Pedro’s Arnalte y Lucenda: Subtext for the
Cardenio Episode of Don Quixote’. In Studies on the Spanish Sentimental
Romance (1440-1550): Redefining a Genre, edited by Joseph G. Gwara and E.
Michael Gerli (London: Tamesis, 1997), pp. 145–50.
Spiller, Elizabeth. ‘Cervantes Avant La Lettre: The Material Transformation of
Romance Reading Culture in Don Quijote’. Modern Language Quarterly 60
(1999): pp. 295–319.
Spitzer, Leo. ‘Linguistic Perspectivism in the Don Quixote’. In Cervantes’s Don
Quixote: A Casebook, edited by Roberto González Echevarría (Oxford: Oxford
UP, 2005), pp. 163–216.
Triplette, Stacey. ‘The Giants of Modernity from Amadís to Don Quijote’. Bulletin
of Spanish Studies XCI (2014): pp. 819–45.
Vickers, Nancy. ‘Diana Described: Scattered Woman and Scattered Rhyme’.
Critical Inquiry 8 (1981): pp. 265–79.
Williamson, Edwin. The Half-Way House of Fiction: Don Quixote and Arthurian
Romance (New York: Oxford University Press, 1984).
Wilson, Diana de Armas. Allegories of Love: Cervantes’s Persiles and Sigismunda
(Princeton: Princeton UP, 1991).
Wilson, Diana de Armas. Cervantes, the Novel, and the New World (Oxford:
Oxford UP, 2003).
Worden, William. ‘Cervantes Transforms Ovid: The Dubious Metamorphoses in
Don Quixote’. In Ovid in the Age of Cervantes, edited by Frederick A. De Armas
(Toronto: U of Toronto P, 2010), pp. 116–36.
Zimic, Stanislav. Los cuentos y las novelas del Quijote (Madrid: Iberoaméricana
Veruvert, 1998).
1 In this essay, I prefer the inclusive ‘early modern’ to ‘Renaissance’ and use
the latter term only when I cite the work of other critics. From the early
twentieth century onward, scholars have debated whether Spain in fact had a
Renaissance and whether Cervantes was a Renaissance author. See Castro and
Avalle-Arce, ‘Cervantes and the Renaissance’, pp. 3–5.
2 Quint, Origin and Originality…, p. 4.
3 Gerli, p. 5.
4 For Don Quixote as the first modern novel, see Lukács, pp. 103–4 and
Bakhtin, p. 80. Doody complicates Lukács and Bakhtin’s definitions (pp. 2–4).
Diana de Armas Wilson notes the political and cultural implications of declaring
Cervantes the origin of the modern novel and lists competitors for the title of
novelistic precursor, among them Heliodorus, Boccaccio, and Dante, important
sources for Cervantes (Cervantes, the Novel…, p. 45).
5 Gerli, p. 2.
6 Quint, Cervantes’s Novel…, p. 5.
7 Mancing, pp. 25–6.
8 Mancing, pp. 32–47.
9 Williamson, p. 124.
10 Avalle-Arce, El Amadís primitivo…, p. 125.
11 Williamson, pp. 38–9; Harney, p. 190; Lida de Malkiel, pp. 414–15.
12 See Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, pp. 72 and 112 for material on
Feliciano de Silva. Other Amadís sequel writers include Ruy Páez de Ribera
(Florisando, 1510), Juan Díaz (Lisuarte de Grecia, 1526), and Erasmian humanist
Pedro de Luján (Silves de la Selva, 1546). Silva’s sequels are Lisuarte de Grecia
(1514), Amadís de Grecia (1530), Florisel de Niquea Parts One and Two (1532),
Florisel de Niquea Part Three, also known as Rogel de Grecia Part I (1535), and
Florisel de Niquea Part Four, also known as Rogel de Grecia Part Two (1551).
Cervantes’s Don Quixote could be considered as part of a long, international
tradition of rewriting Amadís. By the time of Don Quixote, Amadís had been
translated into many languages, including English and French, sometimes with
significant changes, as in the case of Nicholas de Herberay’s best-selling French
Amadis de Gaule (1540), which had more early modern readers than Montalvo’s
version; see Marian Rothstein, p. 32. Scholarship on the Amadís tends to
appreciate Silva’s sequels more than the others; Páez de Ribera and Díaz in
particular demonstrate literary values antithetical to many of the touchstones of
chivalric romance. On the response to sequels to Amadís, see Sales Dasí, p. 118.
13 Girard, p. 3.
14 Triplette, pp. 821–6.
15 El ingenioso…, v. 1, p. 58; Don Quixote, p. 8.
16 Wilson, Cervantes, the Novel…, p. 119.
17 Dopico Black, ‘Canons Afire…’, p. 107.
18 Eisenberg, p. 48.
19 Eisenberg, p. 47.
20 Cruz, p. 4.
21 Rico, p. 14.
22 Cruz, p. 5.
23 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, pp. 271–2.
24 Cruz, p. xv.
25 Gerli, p. 11.
26 Hernández-Pecoraro, pp. 13, 65.
27 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 119.
28 Hernández-Pecoraro, p. 16.
29 Hernández-Pecoraro, p. 81.
30 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 171; Don Quixote, p. 88.
31 Avalle-Arce, La novela…, pp. 25–30; Cravens, pp. 29–32.
32 Hernández-Pecoraro, p. 69.
33 Hernández-Pecoraro, p. 67.
34 Brownlee, pp. 7–12.
35 Severin, p. 145; Spiller, pp. 302–3.
36 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 293.
37 Cervantes, Los trabajos…, pp. 316–19.
38 Cervantes, Los trabajos…, p. 335.
39 Cervantes, Los trabajos…, pp. 408–12.
40 This episode resonates with other Cervantine intertexts as well; see Muñoz
Sánchez’s discussion of Renato’s narration in connection with Heliodorus and
the romances of chivalry (p. 224).
41 Navarrete, pp. 89–125.
42 Cervantes, La Galatea, pp. 616–17; Garcilaso de la Vega, pp. 123, l. 57. All
translations into English are by the author of this chapter unless otherwise
noted.
43 Dudley, p. 30.
44 Aladro-Font and Ramos Tremolada, pp. 89–90.
45 Cervantes cites this same verse in La Galatea (p. 320); see El ingenioso…,
vol. I p. 181 n. 6.
46 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. II pp. 559, 565.
47 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. II p. 568; Don Quixote, p. 917.
48 Aladro-Font and Ramos Tremolada, pp. 97–9.
49 Cervantes, La Galatea, p. 545 n. 20.
50 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 21.
51 Cervantes, Viaje del Parnaso, II.55–6, 304, 388–9.
52 McKendrick, pp. 42–3, 62–3.
53 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 569.
54 McKendrick, p. 137.
55 Gerli, p. 96.
56 De Armas, ‘Cervantes and…’, p. 32.
57 Canavaggio, p. 62.
58 De Armas, Cervantes, Raphael…, pp. 10–11.
59 De Armas, ‘Cervantes and the Italian Renaissance’, p. 33.
60 De Armas, Cervantes, Raphael…, p. 33.
61 Cervantes, Fernando, pp. 330–3.
62 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. II, p. 97; Castro, p. 314, n. 91.
63 Bandera, p. 89.
64 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, v. I, p. 179; p. 93.
65 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, v. II, p. 566; see Chapter 8 of this volume on
Avellaneda.
66 Vickers, pp. 265–6.
67 Navarrete, pp. 1–3.
68 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 176; Don Quixote, p. 91.
69 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, vol. I, p. 52.
70 De Armas, The Invisible Mistress, p. 181.
71 Fuchs, p. 518.
72 Forcione, Cervantes and the…, pp. 31–4, 42.
73 De Armas, The Invisible Mistress, p. 30.
74 De Armas, The Invisible Mistress, pp. 15–19.
75 For an edition of the early modern Spanish translation, see Monzó. For a
critical edition of the medieval French Romance, see Anonymous, Partonopeu de
Blois, edited by Collet and Joris.
76 Hart, p. 17.
77 Hart, pp. 3–4.
78 Hart, p. 19.
79 De Armas, ‘Cervantes and the…’, p. 36.
80 Cervantes, El ingenionso…, vol. I, pp. 318–19.
81 Cervantes, El ingenionso…, vol. I, p. 407.
82 Cervantes, El ingenionso…, vol. I, p. 544; p. 394.
83 Cervantes, El ingenionso…, vol. I, p. 608; p. 449.
84 Cervantes, Viaje del Parnaso, I.1–5.
85 Rivers, pp. 245–6; Lamberti, p. 98.
86 Lamberti, p. 111.
87 Lamberti, p. 110.
88 Caporali, p. 370.
89 Caporali, pp. 373–4.
90 Cascardi, p. 15.
91 Cascardi, p. 17.
92 Castro, p. 300.
93 Forcione, Cervantes and the…, p. 19.
94 Forcione, Cervantes and the…, p. 108.
95 Forcione, Cervantes and the…, p. 99, 103.
96 Cascardi, p. 206.
97 Cascardi, p. 206.
98 Cascardi, p. 130; Wilson, Cervantes, the Novel…, pp. 142–4.
99 Garst-Santos, pp. 65–9.
100 Riley, p. 61.
101 Cervantes, El ingenionso…, vol. I, p. 53; p. 5.
102 Cervantes, El ingenionso…, vol. I, pp. 54–5; p. 6.
103 Riley, pp. 62–3.
104 Cervantes, El ingenionso…, vol. I, p. 50; p. 3.
105 Riley, pp. 2–3.
106 Forcione, Cervantes, Aristotle…, p. 14.
107 De Armas, ‘Cervantes and the…’, p. 39.
108 Cascardi, p. 21.
109 Riley, p. 3.
110 Forcione, Cervantes, Aristotle…, pp. 30–5.
111 Cervantes, Los trabajos…, p. 664.
112 See Arata, ‘La conquista de Jerusalén…’, Kahn ‘Towards a Theory…’, and
Kahn, ‘Even Further…’.
113 Cascardi, pp. 43–4.
114 Cervantes, Aristotle…, p. 12.
115 Forcione, Cervantes, Aristotle…, pp. 32–5.
116 McGaha, p. 34.
117 McGaha, p. 35.
118 McGaha, p. 49.
119 ‘Cervantes and the Italian Renaissance’, p. 34.
120 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 179; p. 93; De Armas, ‘Cervantes and
the…’, p. 45.
121 McGaha, p. 44.
122 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 566; p. 413.
123 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 521; p. 374.
124 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 256; p. 156.
125 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 314; p. 201.
126 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. II, p. 574.
127 Hart, p. 75.
128 McGaha, p. 37.
129 McGaha, p. 36.
130 Mazzotta, p. 92.
131 Mazzotta, p. 83.
132 Mazzotta, p. 85; Spitzer, pp. 163–4.
133 Mazzotta, p. 90.
134 For Cervantes in the context of other adaptations of Heliodorus, see Riley,
p. 59, and Wilson, Allegories of Love…, pp. 20–3.
135 Forcione, Cervantes, Aristotle…, p. 49.
136 Wilson, Allegories of Love…, p. 20.
137 Boruchoff, p. 181.
138 Forcione, Cervantes, Aristotle…, pp. 63–80.
139 Zimic, p. 100.
140 Zimic, p. 96, n.4.
141 Wilson, Cervantes, the Novel…, p. 71.
142 Schevill, pp. 147–8; De Armas, ‘Captured in Ekphrasis…’, pp. 241–2.
143 Worden, p. 116.
144 Worden, pp. 118–22.
145 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. I, p. 292–3; Don Quixote, p. 184.
146 Brownlee, p. 8.
147 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, vol. II, p. 206; Worden, p. 117.
148 De Armas, Cervantes, Raphael…, p. 101.
149 De Armas, Cervantes, Raphael…, p. 13.
150 De Armas, Cervantes, Raphael…, pp. 8–10; Kahn, Ambivalence, p. 149.
151 De Armas, Cervantes, Raphael…, pp. 98–9.
152 De Armas, Cervantes, Raphael…, pp. 106–9.
153 Quint, Epic and Empire, pp. 9–11.
154 De Armas, Cervantes, Raphael…, pp. 139–47; Quint, Epic and Empire, p.
101.
155 Kahn, Ambivalence, pp. 14, 25.
Chapter 24
Cervantes and Lope de Vega
Jonathan Thacker
Exeter College, University of Oxford
Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra and Lope Félix de Vega Carpio were the
two most influential literary figures of early modern Spain. The former
is celebrated as the father of the modern novel, an innovator in prose
fiction, long and short, and creator of two characters, in Don Quixote
and Sancho Panza, who have amused and enchanted readers
consistently for over four hundred years. The latter is remembered as
the father of Spanish Golden Age theatre and a popular and prolific
poet. On the face of it, one might conclude that they complemented
each other well and between them carved up the literary territories
over which they were best suited to reign. Supporting evidence for such
a neat generic division of the literary world might be found in
Cervantes’s decision to publish eight of his plays ‘nunca representados’
[‘never before performed’], which appeared in print in 1615. To
describe them thus was a laconic, coded concession that no actor-
manager would buy them from him, a fact which was made explicit in
the same year in the author’s ‘Adjunta al Parnaso’: ‘ni los autores me
buscan ni yo los voy a buscar a ellos’ [‘the actor-managers do not seek
me out and neither am I going to go looking for them’].1 Lope de
Vega’s admission in 1621, when he published his Novelas a Marcia
Leonarda, that ‘nunca pensé que el novelar entrara en mi pensamiento’
[‘I never thought that the idea of writing novelas would enter my head’]
and that Cervantes wrote them with ‘gracia y estilo’ [‘verve and style’]
would also seem to support this overarching interpretation.2 However,
such a conclusion would be misleading and would mask an intriguing,
deep, productive, and at times unsavoury relationship between the two
men and their work.
There are two aspects to this relationship, though they overlap: on
the one hand, the personal, and on the other, the professional and more
purely literary engagement of the two men. The former may at first
appear to be no more than a bitter-sweet curiosity within the extant
biographical material, but in fact it amounts to more than that. The
latter covers both their expressions of mutual admiration and the clash
of their principles and philosophies and speaks eloquently to the
direction which Spanish Golden Age literature—including drama—was
to take from the late sixteenth century. Indeed, the very creation of the
modern novel can be said to have emerged from their differences. After
beginning, then, with an exploration of the more personal side to the
interaction between these two ambitious writers, this chapter will move
on to examine the way in which their literary output was shaped by the
failure or success of the other on the corral [playhouse] boards or in the
Madrid bookshops.
Cervantes was born in 1547, only fifteen years before Lope de Vega,
but the worlds they grew up in looked remarkably different from each
other in several regards. The novelist’s birth-place, Alcalá de Henares,
only some twenty miles from Madrid, was the seat of the medieval
Complutense University, which had become a renowned centre of
Spanish humanist learning in the early sixteenth century. Alcalá,
however, was about to fall into the shadow cast by Philip II’s new
capital, Madrid, which grew rapidly from 1561, attracting thousands of
new residents from Spain and beyond. Lope, born in 1562, was the son
of one couple who had followed the court, his father making a living as
an embroiderer. Along with the new centre and the new monarch—
Charles V (Charles I of Spain) had abdicated in favour of his son,
Philip, in 1556—came new policies and attitudes; for example, in
Philip II’s responses to the threats of Lutheranism in Spain. J. H. Elliott
writes of the period, ‘these were the years [1556–63] in which
Renaissance Spain, wide open to European humanist influences, was
effectively transformed into the semi-closed Spain of the Counter-
Reformation’.3 Cervantes would have grown up conscious of these
changes, though the family moved around and did not stay in Alcalá,
whereas Lope was a child of the post-Tridentine world of Philip II.
The settling and consolidation of the court in the new capital
provided favourable conditions for the emergence of the professional
entertainer and also the professional author. Though individual patrons
continued to reward writers, including dramatists, with their support,
they were no longer vital for their survival. The printing press had
come of age, there was a mass audience in the burgeoning cities of the
peninsula, communication was comparatively quick, and there were
entrepreneurs keen to invest, turn a profit, and be successful. Success in
the world of playwriting brought fame and fortune, but it was
necessary to get the ingredients right in this quickly-changing sphere.
The experience that Cervantes had had watching theatre as a youth, in
the late 1550s and early 1560s, quickly became an object of nostalgic
reminiscence. In the prologue to his published plays, from 1615, he
recalled seeing perform with his company the itinerant actor-manager,
the ‘gran Lope de Rueda, varón insigne en la representación y en el
entendimiento’ [‘the great Lope de Rueda, a man outstanding in both
his performing and his intelligence’].4 Rueda was a goldbeater by trade
whose troupe would set up a makeshift stage, perform, and move on.
However, within twenty years of Cervantes’s witnessing Rueda’s
players’ dramatic entertainments, permanent playhouses had been
established in Seville, in Madrid, and in other Spanish cities and an
industry was evolving quickly. Going to the theatre had changed
completely as an experience in less than a generation.
By contrast then, amongst Lope’s first dramatic experiences in his
native city would have been that of applauding the highly developed
theatre of the Italians, notably the commedia dell’arte actors led by the
famous Ganassa, who was instrumental in the professionalizing of the
industry in Spain.5 In the 1580s he would have also seen works in the
new theatres by tragedians such as Andrés Rey de Artieda, Cristóbal de
Virués, Lupercio Leonardo de Argensola, and Miguel de Cervantes
himself, newly ransomed from his Algerian enslavement and keen to
make a name for himself as a dramatist. These figures took their
inspiration from classical writers, notably Seneca, and neo-Aristotelian
theory, but their work did not capture the imagination of the new
broader audiences in the corrales. The failure of this generation to
maximise the potential of the corral stage and fully win over the mass
public was one of the catalysts for Lope de Vega’s conception of a new
mixed kind of theatre, the comedia nueva. Herein lay the germ of a later
aesthetic disagreement between the two men, and in the birth of Lope’s
anti-classical comedia one starts to glimpse the principal source of their
rivalry.
At first, however, the apparent clash of Cervantes’s backward-
looking drama and Lope de Vega’s progressive plays does not seem to
have been a cause of animosity—literary or personal—between the two
men. Despite the age gap they had much in common, though it is not
known how well they knew each other in the final two decades of the
sixteenth century as each strove for literary success. The pursuit of a
writerly vocation—evident very early in Lope’s life—had been delayed
in Cervantes’s case, because of his military career, including service at
Lepanto, and his subsequent captivity in Algiers. Born not far apart in
Castile, both men also had connections with Andalusia and might have
been there simultaneously in 1602.6 Cervantes certainly spent time in
and around Seville in the 1580s, requisitioning supplies for the
Armada, with which Lope might have sailed. Neither man studied at a
university and both were largely self-taught, though their attitude to
erudition was markedly different, as we shall see. Both had trouble
with the authorities; Lope was exiled from the court and from Castile,
and Cervantes was imprisoned on two or more occasions in Seville
when he was a tax-collector. Both were humbly born, though whilst
Lope brazenly attempted to climb socially, Cervantes gives the
impression of being more content with his station in life. Both
apparently became more pious as they grew older.
The evidence for cordial personal relations between the two writers
comes firstly from their own works from the period in which they
praise each other, and secondly from the preliminaries to others’ works
to which they both contributed laudatory verses. In his pastoral
romance, La Galatea, published in 1585 (but approved for publication
in February 1584), Cervantes includes Lope amongst the several dozen
contemporary poets who deserve mention for their quality:
Muestra en un ingenio la experiencia
que en años verdes y en edad temprana
hace su habitación así la ciencia,
como en la edad madura, antigua y cana.
No entraré con alguno en competencia
que contradiga una verdad tan llana,
y más si acaso a sus oídos llega
que lo digo por vos, Lope de Vega.7
[Experience demonstrates, in the shape of one particular talent,
that knowledge may reside amongst green years
and in the time of a man’s youth
as readily as in that of maturity, old age and white hair.
I should not concur with anyone
who were to contradict so plain a truth,
and especially if he were to hear
that I have you in mind, Lope de Vega.]
The praise is perhaps a little faint when compared to that offered up to
some of the other figures eulogised in the octavas of the ‘Canto de
Calíope’ section of this, Cervantes’s first major published work, but
there is certainly no animosity and Lope is then a young poet making
his mark.8
In his own pastoral romance, La Arcadia (1598), Lope returns the
favour, including Cervantes amongst the many portraits of literary and
other important figures of the day uncovered in the palace by Anfriso
and Frondoso, the bold shepherds.9 Cervantes does not contribute a
sonnet to Lope’s published works before 1602, but conclusions cannot
safely be drawn from his absence from these early works’ preliminaries.
What evidence there is suggests that the two men entertained cordial
relations when in Madrid or coinciding elsewhere during the period
(Lope is exiled from the capital between 1588 and 1595). Lope referred
to La Galatea and its author in at least one early work for the stage, La
viuda valenciana, written around 1599 (though not published until
1620).10 Otón, who has fallen for the young Valencian widow,
Leonarda, disguises himself and attempts to sell her some books:
Aquéste es la Galatea,
que si buen libro desea,
no tiene más que pedir.
Fue su autor Miguel Cervantes,
que allá en la Naval perdió
una mano…11
[This one is La Galatea
and, if you want a good book,
look no further.
Its author was Miguel Cervantes
who lost a hand in the sea
battle (of Lepanto)…]
The book is recommended highly by the character and Cervantes is
known and admired as the patriotic hero who was wounded, risking his
life in the Mediterranean, in battle against the Turks.
During the late 1580s, as Lope was developing his dramatic formula
in Madrid and just before his exile, both men contributed laudatory
verses to the preliminaries of works by other writers they knew: Fray
Pedro Padilla, López Maldonado, and the doctor, Francisco Díaz, who
had written a treatise on illnesses of the kidney and bladder.12 The
most interesting of the eulogistic texts, however, is Cervantes’s sonnet
in the preliminaries to the 1602 Madrid edition of Lope’s epic poem on
the figure of Sir Francis Drake, La Dragontea. Cervantes puns on Lope’s
family name, Vega [meadow], ‘Yace en la parte que es mejor de España
/ un apacible y siempre verde vega’ [‘There lies in the better part of
Spain / a peaceful and ever green meadow’], and demonstrates a good
knowledge of the younger poet’s recent publications ‘de ángeles, de
armas, santos, y pastores’ [‘of angels, of arms, saints, and shepherds’].13
The sonnet was not included in the first edition of the work (Valencia,
1598), but Cervantes might have provided the paean either in 1602 in
Seville or later that year when both writers were in Madrid, as Pedraza
speculates. It remains in place in later editions even after the souring of
relations between the two men.14
It is not known for certain what caused the rupture in these
mutually respectful relations, a rupture that was manifest by 1604.
There might have been a particular incident that upset one of them;
Lope might have associated Cervantes with poets from Seville who had
begun to attack him; the former’s social climbing may have irritated
the older man as it annoyed others, such as Lope’s close contemporary,
the Cordoban poet, Luis de Góngora; or perhaps the undoubted victory
of the comedia nueva in the theatres of the peninsula with its side-lining
of the arte antiguo [old art] of playwriting, to which Cervantes adhered
fruitlessly in the 1590s, overwhelmed him. Despite the 1585
publication of the Galatea (a mixture of prose and verse as befitted the
pastoral genre) Cervantes had been and probably still thought of
himself primarily as a playwright; certainly that was where the money
was to be made for a writer at the time, and he was short of it. In 1592
he had signed a contract to deliver six plays to Rodrigo Osorio, though
he is unlikely to have fulfilled his side of the deal.15 Cervantes’s
wistfulness in the aforementioned prologue to his published plays,
written in 1615, perhaps results from a mellowing of his once painful
memories of rejection at the hands of the professional actor-managers
during the time of animosity with Lope:
Algunos años ha que volví yo a mi antigua ociosidad, y pensando que
aún duraban los siglos donde corrían mis alabanzas, volví a componer
algunas comedias; pero no hallé pájaros en los nidos de antaño; quiero
decir que no hallé autor que me las pidiese, puesto que sabían que las
tenía.16
[Some years ago I returned to my former leisure and, thinking that the
times when my stock was high were still with us, I went back to writing
plays. But I found no birds in the nests of yesteryear; I mean I found no
actor-manager who would ask me for the plays, though they knew I had
them.]
By 1615, in his old age and having finally achieved literary fame, he
has come to terms with the success of ‘el monstruo de naturaleza, el
gran Lope de Vega [que] alzóse con la monarquía cómica’17 [‘the freak
of nature, the great Lope de Vega (who) carried off the theatrical
crown’], but in 1604 he felt that he was fighting Lope’s predominance
in a battle for his own literary future. In this context it would not have
been difficult for anyone to resent Lope and find reasons to despise
him.
The ill-feeling between the writers is most evident in three sources:
first, in a (private) letter to an unknown recipient written by Lope in
1604, after he has apparently read Don Quixote, which expresses a view
that must have been widely known in the academies and literary circles
of Madrid and beyond; second, in Cervantes’s (public) prologue to the
first part of his great novel; and third, in an exchange of anonymous
sonnets, one an attack on Lope’s most recent literary posturing and
production, and the second a response aimed at Cervantes’s work and
personal life.
To start with the letter: writing of poetas [poets / playwrights], Lope
avers: ‘ninguno hay tan malo como Cervantes ni tan necio que alabe a
Don Quijote’ [‘there is none so bad as Cervantes and none so foolish as
to write laudatory verses for his Don Quixote’].18 In the same candid
mood he admits that Cervantes despises his plays but that if anyone
thinks he writes them for the good opinion of others he should be
disabused: he does it for the money. This second admission is
interesting; it suggests that Cervantes’s criticism of the comedia nueva
(possibly in the guise of the canon of Toledo in Don Quixote I.47–8,
possibly in other fora) has irked Lope. As in his later Arte nuevo de hacer
comedias en este tiempo (published in 1609, but delivered earlier as a
speech to an academy), Lope is rather defensive about his rejection of
neoclassical norms. In public at the time he would never have
mentioned writing for money rather than the glory of a place on
Parnassus, and the insight suggests that he is aware that some of
Cervantes’s reservations about the quality of the theatre, to which he
has acted as midwife, are valid. Lope is certainly stung by the way he is
portrayed in Cervantes’s 1605 novel.
We might never learn what slight or fit of pique led to Lope and his
friends and acolytes refusing to write poems in praise of this novel, but
it was a deep-seated falling out, and more than an aesthetic
disagreement. One theory has it that Lope saw the very figure of Don
Quixote as a caricature of him. In his early romances [ballads] he had
lived out his frustrations and jealous passion in a public fashion
through grandiose literary alter egos—Zaide, and Azarque, and Gazul,
who slashes his rival in two, as Don Quixote often aims to do.19
Whatever the truth of this (and of course the novel is, from the start,
much more than a clever personal vendetta) Lope is the unnamed but
obvious target in both the prologue and the canon of Toledo’s literary
discussion with the priest in the two late chapters of Part I.
It seems unlikely to have been at Cervantes’s invitation that Lope
read Don Quixote in 1604 in advance of its publication. He must have
seen it or heard about it through a mutual acquaintance, perhaps
someone who was being asked for a preliminary sonnet. It is fair to
assume that the prologue was written just before publication and after
Cervantes’s decision that, in the absence of contributions from his
fellow poets, he would write the laudatory poems to his work himself
in the guise of praise for Don Quixote from the likes of Amadís de
Gaula, Belianís de Grecia, and Orlando Furioso. Thus it would have
been the content of the novel itself that offended Lope, and the
prologue became a chance for Cervantes to hit out at his rival. Perhaps
Lope did see ad hominem satire in the way Don Quixote arms himself
and rides out against anyone perceived to have slighted his lady
Dulcinea. He would have known for certain that he was the ‘felicísimo
ingenio destos reinos’ [‘brilliant Spanish genius’] praised for his
abilities but also implicitly criticized for failing to adhere to some basic
rules of playwriting, and thus helping to produce the works for the
stage which are ‘espejos de diparates, ejemplos de necedades e
imágenes de lascivia’ [‘mirrors of absurdity, exemplars of folly and
images of lewdness’].20 The priest’s lengthy and thorough-going
critique of the comedia nueva is taken by scholars to coincide with
Cervantes’s views on drama at the time. It pulls no punches and the
dispensation of Lope from the worst excesses of the contemporary
playwrights does not exempt him from blame: ‘y por querer
acomodarse al gusto de los representantes, no han llegado todas, como
han llegado algunas, al punto de la perfección que requieren’21 [‘yet his
urge to comply with the actors’ taste has meant that not all his plays
have reached the required pitch of perfection, although some certainly
have’]. Cervantes would undoubtedly have known that Lope would
take the priest’s words personally because he knew the petulant and
egocentric personality of the younger man, one which is still easily
glimpsed today in Lope’s own defensive prologues and dedications.
Cervantes’s literary isolation is a feature of the prologue to the 1605
Don Quixote. He burns any remaining bridges with Lope and his
powerful literary supporters in what Close calls a ‘brilliantly witty’
prologue and ‘the bitchiest piece Cervantes ever wrote’. He goes on:
‘the references to other writers, particularly Lope de Vega, are insistent,
specific, and recognizable, and are continued in the burlesque
preliminary verses’.22 Close explains the anxieties behind Cervantes’s
prologue convincingly in terms of the relationship between the two
great writers and in particular the soon-to-be-novelist’s failure as a
dramatist. Through his self-presentation as a simple, self-deprecating
soul who has come up with a comic tale and his invention of a
facetious friend to give him advice on how to introduce it, Cervantes
both justifies his own aesthetic judgement and ridicules the tendencies
of his rival. He explains to his friend that Don Quixote will emerge ‘falta
de toda erudición y doctrina, sin acotaciones en las márgenes y sin
anotaciones en el fin del libro’ [‘lacking all erudition and instruction,
without any marginalia or endnotes’],23 in short, what makes readers
admire authors and take them for learned and eloquent men. He has in
mind, then, the ‘parade of pedantry and moralizing without artistic
justification’24 that he perceives in the work of less disciplined writers
and, concretely, Lope’s recent publications, the Arcadia, El Isidro
(1599), and El peregrino en su patria (1604), which contain often
abundant marginalia, alphabetical tables, and indices. Everybody knew
that Lope was making use of Renaissance compendia, such as that by
Ravisius Textor, and that his erudition was skin deep, but, defeated as a
playwright and threatened as a prose writer, especially by the
appearance of El peregrino, Cervantes, in a ‘paranoid reaction’, was in a
mood to underline the fact.25
The other surviving evidence of mutual animosity in this period
comes in the form of the abovementioned sonnets. These were not
published but circulated in manuscript. The first is a sarcastic attack,
most likely composed in 1604, on everything Lope had published since
1598, including the sonnets in the Rimas (1604), the epic poems and
prose miscellanies already mentioned, and the first of his dramatic
works, which had emerged in 1603 in Lisbon and in the Parte primera
in 1604 in Zaragoza.26 The riposte from Lope (or one of his followers)
is savage and aimed squarely at Cervantes. It might be the poem the
novelist refers to in the ‘Adjunta al Parnaso’, as having been delivered
to his door in Valladolid, and, if so, the memory of it obviously still
hurt him ten years later in 1614.27 In the sonnet, Cervantes is ridiculed
for pretending to be able to compete with Lope, he is accused of being
a cuckold, and his mutilation at the battle of Lepanto is mocked: ‘Para
que no escribieses, orden fue / del cielo que mancases en Corfú’
[‘Heaven ordained that you lose your hand in Corfu to stop you from
writing’]. Finally even Don Quixote himself is lampooned:
Y ese tu Don Quijote baladí,
de culo en culo por el mundo va,
vendiendo especias y azafrán romí,
y al fin en muladares parará.
[And your Don Quixote, he’s pathetic;
he goes around the world from arse to arse,
selling spices and bastard saffron,
and will end up on a dung-heap.]
The personal animosity between Lope and Cervantes was never again
as fierce. In some of his mature plays, notably La dama boba, written in
1613, Lope alludes to Cervantes’s work, usually in fact the figure of
Don Quixote, as many other dramatists did. (Ironically, given his own
literary trajectory, several of Cervantes’s prose works were adapted for
the stage by contemporary dramatists.) And after the older writer’s
death in 1616, Lope shows mainly respect for his erstwhile rival’s
literary legacy and pedigree, recalling him, for example, as one of the
good poets of the 1580s in his 1632 prose dialogue, La Dorotea.28 And
Cervantes’s late prologues are more mellow affairs with even his scorn
for the anonymous writer, known as Alonso Fernández de Avellaneda,
who produced a sequel to Don Quixote in 1614, kept under control. By
this time there is no paranoia and his own literary fame is established:
Don Quixote has become a best-seller, and its author is enjoying an
Indian summer. We shall return to the two Part IIs of Don Quixote—the
one written by ‘Avellaneda’, this supporter of Lope, and Cervantes’s
own, from 1615—along with their prologues in due course, since their
engagement principally takes place on a literary rather than a personal
ground.
The two areas are difficult to separate: Cervantes’s most hostile
personal attack comes in 1604 when he feels most vulnerable as a
writer, as we have seen. However, it is enlightening to trace the
aesthetic differences that exacerbated the writers’ animosity—and
which could be used personally—and to do so we must first return to
the theatre in the 1580s.
As McKendrick states of late sixteenth- and early seventeenth-
century Spain, ‘drama and poetry were the two connected areas of
artistic endeavour which dominated literary output and in which
literary reputations were made’.29 In the mid-1580s Cervantes was
confident that he was forging a reputation as a poeta of the dramatic
variety, and he must have at least dreamed of a long career as a
playwright with the relative financial security that the profession was
starting to bring in the period.30 In his potted history of Spanish
theatre, which gives a structure to the prologue to his plays published
in 1615, he refers back to this time ‘que se vieron en los teatros de
Madrid representar Los tratos de Argel, que yo compuse; La destrucción
de Numancia y La batalla naval’ [‘which saw in the Madrid theatres
performances of The Traffic of Algiers, which I wrote; The Destruction of
Numancia and The Naval Battle’].31 He claims that he wrote twenty or
thirty plays that were not badly received and that he was a dramatic
innovator in several important respects. Whether Cervantes was ‘slow
to understand that the new commercial theatre…could contrive to
combine popularity with art’32 or whether he remained deliberately,
obstinately aloof from the new trends as the voices of the priest and
canon of Toledo in Don Quixote might suggest, his dramatic career
faltered. He might indeed have had other things to do, as he claims in
the prologue, but it is difficult to imagine him wanting to leave Madrid
at the time when Lope was becoming popular if he was making money
from the theatre, as his rival certainly was.
Lope de Vega’s early and then sustained, long-term success in the
corrales is the most significant stimulus for Cervantes’s carefully worded
comments on theatrical aesthetics, notably in this prologue to his Ocho
comedias, in Don Quixote I.47–8, in the ‘Adjunta al Parnaso’, and in the
opening to Act Two of his play, El rufián dichoso. Indeed Cervantes’s
whole literary direction in the second phase of his career as a writer
was affected by the reach and power of Lope’s quill. This does not
mean, of course, that it should be read as merely that, but it is rather
that Cervantes built into his own aesthetic knowledge of a competing
one more in thrall to the market-place. The reluctant move away from
playwriting did not affect his theorizing, however. The insistence of
Cervantes’s aesthetic engagement with his fellow writers and his own
frequent formal experimentation reveal his undoubted concern with
what constituted good art and, at first, this was associated with, though
not slavishly dependent upon, neoclassical theories. Plato’s anxiety
about the role of the poet in society, Aristotle’s writings about history
and poetry and tragedy (with its differentiation from comedy), Horace’s
advice concerning the balance between entertaining and instructing,
Cicero’s analogy of the theatre to a mirror, and Seneca’s dramatic
practice were all influential. Cervantes’s instincts, perhaps thanks to the
more humanist outlook of his youth, were to look backwards for
inspiration and a tragedy such as El cerco de Numancia, in which the
influence of classical drama, including Seneca, is obvious, has helped to
consolidate the impression of the dramatist’s preceptista [prescriptively
neoclassical] inclinations. In fact, although we do not have enough
evidence to prove it in Cervantes’s case, in his drama of the period he
was probably searching for a successful blend that would satisfy both
the discretos [the educated audience] and the vulgo [the masses]. This
was certainly the case for his admired contemporary, Cristóbal de
Virués, more of whose plays from the period are extant.33 It was Lope
de Vega, though, who gradually developed the formula that appealed
to a broad audience and he enjoyed the fruits of victory, leaving other
writers frustrated and in some cases in vindictive mood.
The impasse between the two dramatists in this period, then, should
not be oversimplified, as it sometimes is, and presented as a stand-off
between 
a 
dyed-in-the-wool 
classicist 
and 
a 
crowd-pleasing
modernizer.34 Lope was able to see from going to the theatre that the
old division between comedy and tragedy was restrictive and off-
putting to the contemporary audience, particularly in the limitations it
placed on the subject matter to be dramatized. He was inspired to
rework Ariosto’s Orlando Furioso, to plunder stories and themes from
the popular ballads and Spanish history, to set plays in rural Spain
amongst the peasants, to explore themes of love and honour and of
kingship, and to be topical. He gradually perfected the figure of the
gracioso [the comic servant] and also for a time ‘cultivated the figure of
the sage and witty madman’.35 Cervantes, if he does speak through the
priest and canon of Toledo as he seems to, by no means rejects all of
these reforms, but he does object to the carelessness of the art when it
is bad and, in particular, offences against ‘his two major literary
principles, decorum and verisimilitude’.36 Cervantes always writes for a
thoughtful audience or reader and dislikes a lowering of aesthetic
standards as well as overt moralizing and didacticism, a quarrel he had
with some picaresque works. How, he wonders, can one take seriously
a work of art which one cannot respect in even fundamental ways?
How can one learn from something one knows is wrong in some
regard? The priest’s response to the canon of Toledo in Don Quixote I.48
is the best expression of this attitude and a sense of the argument can
be gleaned from the following excerpt:
…y fundándose la comedia sobre cosa fingida, atribuirle verdades de
historia y mezclarle pedazos de otras sucedidas a diferentes personas y
tiempos, y esto no con trazas verisímiles, sino con patentes errores, de
todo punto inexcusables…Pues ¿qué, si venimos a las comedias divinas?
¡Qué de milagros falsos fingen en ellas, qué de cosas apócrifas y mal
entendidas, atribuyendo en un santo los milagros de otro!
[…and although the play is based on fictitious actions, historical
veracity is claimed for it, and bits and pieces of other histories
involving different people and periods are mixed in, and without any
attempt at verisimilitude either, but with obvious mistakes that are
quite inexcusable…And what about plays on religious subjects? How
many false miracles they invent, how many apocryphal and
misunderstood events, with the miracles of one saint attributed to
another!]37
When Cervantes composes plays taken from his own imagination, he
tends not to alienate his audience with impossible or unlikely events or
unrealistic characters, a ‘viejo valiente y un mozo cobarde, un lacayo
retórico, un paje consejero, un rey ganapán y una princesa fregona’ [‘an
old man who’s courageous and a young one who’s a coward, a lackey
who’s a great orator, a page who’s a counsellor, a king who’s a porter
and a princess who’s a cleaning-woman’].38 In his only comedia divina
[religious play], El rufián dichoso, Cervantes takes pains in his stage
directions, to the point of pedantry, to demonstrate that he is following
his sources, and he justifies the move from Spain to Mexico, between
Acts One and Two, with a conversation between the personified
Comedia and Curiosidad. Characteristically—and paradoxically—he
discusses and defends, with a bold piece of metatheatre, the formal
liberty his audience might believe him to be taking in his play.
The fact that Cervantes singles Lope out as superior to his followers,
as we have noted, and that he feels that he has produced some fine
plays, should help underline the fact that it is not novelty itself that
Cervantes deplores. He never tires of questioning generic boundaries
himself in prose and poetry. His own Ocho comedias of 1615 (of which
El rufián dichoso is one) are quite distinct from his Numancia and they
contain a lot of variety and experimentation. McKendrick has it that in
this collection ‘he reworked some of his old plays and possibly wrote a
few new ones, making concessions to the spirit of the new drama, but
no actor-manager would perform them’.39 Indeed, some probably are
rewritten, turned from early four-act pieces to three-act ones, but they
engage with Lope and the comedia nueva rather than conceding ground.
They remain the products of a sceptical and independent mind.
What Henry calls the ‘“anti-Lope” aspects of Cervantes’s drama’,40
this engagement with the now dominant generic norms of the comedia
nueva is present in a variety of ways in the Ocho comedias, cleverly
incorporated into the themes and maybe the purpose of the drama too.
Thus, the strained relationship with Lope’s dramatic production
allowed Cervantes’s theatre to blossom at the same time as it fails to
find an audience. It emerges in part as a response to the perceived
artistic failings of the dominant genre as a few brief examples will
demonstrate.
In Pedro de Urdemalas, Cervantes dramatizes scenes in the life of an
established folkloric figure. The play resembles a Lopean comedia nueva
on the page—it is polymetric and in three acts, and its title is even
identical to one of a similar period probably by Lope. However, the
dramatist pointedly ignores Lope’s fundamental advice from his Arte
nuevo that a play’s story ‘de ninguna manera sea episódica’ [‘should in
no way be episodic’].41 Instead we have a series of barely linked
vignettes from Pedro’s picaresque life. Additionally, the main love
story, between the galán [male lead] Clemente, and the dama [female
lead] Clemencia, is resolved at the end of Act One; a potential love
interest for Pedro, that might have provided a structuring narrative,
dissolves; the king and queen are reduced to Punch-and-Judy-like
figures; and at the end, in a Cervantine mise-en-abîme, the protagonist
becomes an actor.42 The work Pedro’s troupe is about to perform as the
play closes ‘no acaba en casamiento, / cosa común y vista cien mil
veces’ [‘doesn’t end in marriage as is usual and witnessed a hundred
thousand times before’].43 We glimpse here the author’s frustration
with the status quo, but the novel form of his play also contributes to
its message about the individual’s search for identity in life, the failure
of life to conform to norms, and even the power of theatricality and
pretence.
El rufián dichoso can also be seen as a conscious engagement with
Lope’s dramatic form. Cervantes seems deliberately to challenge a
whole series of Lope’s recommendations set out in the Arte nuevo in
what begins to look like parody; inter alia, he again depends on an
episodic development of the story, he sets up and then cursorily
abandons an honour plot (so popular with Golden Age audiences), he
undermines Lope’s norms on the use of verse forms and character types,
and he allows years to pass between the acts.44 In La entretenida, there
are similar attempts to parody Lope and engage with his dramatic
aesthetic, often again by refusing to bow to the generic norms of a
comedia type—here the comedia de capa y espada [cape and sword
play]. Indeed Zimic, who explores this process, attributes the attack on
Cervantes in the prologue to the spurious part II of Don Quixote, in
which he thinks Lope had a big hand, directly to Cervantes’s parodic
intentions in La entretenida.45 And a fourth play from the Ocho
comedias, La casa de los celos y selvas de Ardenia, is also, argues Marcela
Trambaioli, a deep and parodic engagement with another subgenre of
Lope’s comedia, on this occasion it is a ‘diálogo intertextual con el
teatro de abolengo ariostesco de Lope’ [‘an intertextual dialogue with
Lope’s plays inspired by Ariosto’].46 Though, in this case, the parody
seems evident, this critic believes that both men are in fact feeling their
way formally as they experiment with using novelesque material as the
basis for drama.47
This last point is important. Trambaioli demonstrates that specific
cases of Cervantine parody of Lope’s early theatre are manifest and
visible, even when Cervantes is likely to have seen these plays in the
theatre rather than to have read them.48 Nevertheless, Cervantes’s
parody, just as in the case of Don Quixote and the romances of chivalry,
is not aimed merely at destroying a popular genre. It is wittily
corrective and constructive in both cases. Cervantes does not think that
the comedia nueva, child of Lope’s popular success, is good enough or
ambitious enough artistically but his own intertextual engagement with
it helps him to discover and develop his own dramatic voice and style,
encouraging him towards a new understanding of what theatre can be
and do. This is a productive quarrel with Lope and his dominant
dramatic form. Despite his life-long love of the stage, Cervantes
becomes resigned to failure within his time but does not disappear
quietly or turn against the theatre as one of his contemporaries,
Lupercio Leonardo de Argensola, did when he experienced similar
misgivings.49
Does he, though, have his eye on the future, a post-Lopean world in
which a new, more satisfying brand of theatre can pull in an audience?
In the ‘Adjunta al Parnaso’ the fictionalized Miguel wistfully notes that
‘las comedias tienen sus sazones y tiempos’ [‘plays have their seasons
and their times’].50 And in recent years, scholars such as Canavaggio,
Friedman, González Maestro, and Henry have argued in different ways
in their monographs for the ‘modernidad’ [modernity] of his drama.51
Thus, Henry, to take the most recent example, understands Cervantes’s
theatre as engaged with Lope—of course—but as revealing a ‘counter-
perspective aesthetic’. The dramatist is fundamentally concerned with
freedom and identity so that, she argues, in two of the plays we have
mentioned, Pedro de Urdemalas and El rufián dichoso, what is conveyed
is ‘that life itself is a set of performances which requires astute aptitude
for acting, sharp perception and the ability to distinguish between
reality and illusion’.52
By the time Cervantes published his plays in 1615 (and indeed the
Viaje del Parnaso in 1614) he could afford to smile and to downplay the
strength of his past feelings about his failure to conquer the corral. It
had turned out that in the ten years since his anxious and spiky
prologue to the first part of Don Quixote, he had won success and
admiration as a novelist and short story writer instead, even beyond
Spain. This was an ironic twist in the literary relations between the two
writers and one whose consequences are still with us. While Lope
remained extremely popular in Spain during his lifetime and for the
rest of the seventeenth century, his plays were often later reworked
into refundiciones [rehashings] and, unlike Shakespeare’s, his fame
diminished inside his native country and never expanded far beyond its
borders. Cervantes, by contrast, began to fill his idle moments by
writing prose fiction and came up with the model for the modern
novel, ensuring the endurance of his legacy and his name domestically
and internationally.
By way of a conclusion to this chapter we might ponder two final
questions: to what degree was Lope de Vega responsible for Cervantes’s
change in literary direction, and how did their relationship develop as a
result of the older man’s late success in the bookshops. The answer to
the first must be speculative. Leaving aside the possibility of a direct
connection—that Don Quixote, the figure, might have been inspired by
Lope’s tendency to self-dramatization—we can say that Cervantes was
already keen on prose works. He was an avid reader of all other
literature from the highly esteemed form of epic poetry to works
written in prose which were generally less reputable or whose pedigree
was unproven. He had strong feelings about the various genres—new
and old—in which his predecessors and contemporaries wrote. As we
have had cause to mention, his first major publication, in 1585, is a
romance, La Galatea, which makes a contribution to an existing
pastoral tradition, one which mixed prose and poetry; in the prologue
to the Novelas ejemplares, he self-consciously claims to be the first to
have written in that genre in Spanish, which means he knows the
Italian novellieri and Spanish imitators and translators well; and the
‘inquisition’ of Don Quixote’s library in I.5–6, as well as the parodic
skill of that work as a whole, demonstrate a close knowledge of prose
genres from the picaresque to the chivalric. His posthumously
published Persiles y Sigismunda is a Christianized Byzantine romance,
based on the ancient Greek ‘novel’ Aethiopica by Heliodorus. So
Cervantes was attracted to prose writing as well as theatre and had
plenty to contribute in that only partially tilled field. If his hand was
indeed forced towards publication of prose works because he could not
fulfil his theatrical vocation, it was not a poor second that he chose,
although, significantly, there was much less money to be made from
publishing prose fiction than there was from selling plays, and he was
not well off. If Cervantes had made money as a playwright, his prose
fiction might have taken on a dramatic form, or remained a series of
ideas or drafts tucked away in a trunk in the ‘perpetuo silencio’
[‘perpetual silence’] to which he claimed to have once condemned his
plays.53
As far as literary relations between the two in the final years of
Cervantes’s life are concerned, the most important publications were
the 1614 spurious Don Quixote, in whose composition Lope was
probably involved, and Cervantes’s own part II, of the following year,
whose later chapters and prologue engage with the impostor(s).
Scholars have looked for actual characterizations of Cervantes in
Avellaneda’s Quixote and of Lope in Cervantes’s sequel but, as Pedraza
notes, it is difficult to prove they exist.54 More significant is
Avellaneda’s very decision to compose a work which was unlikely to
repeat the success of the original and may even have spurred Cervantes
on to finish his own second part—a possibility raised by Pedraza—and
the prologue which comments on Cervantes’s first part.55 This prologue
is written by a ‘friend’ of Lope who raises the spiteful possibility of its
publication denying Cervantes some of his earnings and returns to some
rather half-hearted baiting of the old man for his lack of a left hand, his
imprisonment in Seville and the effect that had on him, his envy, and
for his age and crotchety mood, ‘que todo y todos le enfadan, y por ello
está tan falto de amigos’ [‘so that everything and everyone annoys him
and because of that he’s so short of friends’].56 Cervantes had praised
Lope, though only faintly, in his Viaje del Parnaso, the year before, but
relations were obviously frosty once again.57
As far as Cervantes’s works are concerned, the prologue writer opens
by observing that ‘casi es comedia la historia de Don Quijote de la
Mancha’ [‘the story of Don Quixote of la Mancha is almost a play’] and
that his own sequel can be described as an attempt to ‘entremesar’ this
play, that is, turn it into an entremés [farcical interlude with lowlife
characters].58 Later on, Avellaneda tells his reader to content himself
with Cervantes’s ‘Galatea y comedias en prosa; que eso son las más de
sus novelas’ [‘Galatea and plays in prose, which is what most of his
Novelas are’].59 Earlier in the piece the Novelas have been described as
more satirical than exemplary, but cleverly done.
In the prologue to his own Part II, Cervantes shows that he has
understood Avellaneda’s words well but replies in a dignified manner
with regard to his appearance and scars of battle, proclaiming that
‘entendimiento’ [understanding] improves with age. He claims not to
be envious of Lope except in a good way, as an admirer of his plays and
of his talents. There is, nevertheless, an ironic reference to Lope’s
‘virtuous’ personal life that is just discernible.60 Generally, however,
Cervantes exudes a pride and confidence in his own artistic
achievements that prevents him from needing to enter into a war of
words with his detractor. Instead, with the help of two anecdotes, he
characterizes the pseudonymous author as a madman failing to see the
qualities of Don Quixote or to understand his own inability to make an
impression on the original. He is pleased that his Novelas are seen as
satirical, but he wilfully understands the term in the strict sense of
‘possessing variety’. He does not respond to Avellaneda’s description of
his most famous prose works as plays, perhaps because he saw there a
truth that others since have glimpsed: many of his raw materials, in
terms of plots and characters, and much of his technique are highly
theatrical. Cervantes has produced his great novel and his short stories
at least in part because he is a frustrated dramatist.
It is quite possible that the personal offence taken at each other’s
pronouncements, especially after about 1602, hid the admiration Lope
de Vega and Cervantes actually had for each other as artists and
creators. If Cervantes found the comedia nueva difficult to stomach, he
always conceded that Lope was a good dramatist, and if Lope took
Cervantes’s criticisms of the genre, of his selling out to the masses, to
heart, then he also admired Don Quixote and imitated, in his own
Novelas a Marcia Leonarda, a form that he had once considered ‘cosa
indigna de hombres de letras’ [‘something unworthy of men of
letters’].61 As Cervantes neared death and Lope entered old age it seems
the better part of each man’s nature was to come to the fore.
Works Cited
Canavaggio, Jean. Cervantès dramaturge: un théâtre à naître (Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France, 1977).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Don Quijote de la Mancha, edited by Francisco Rico
(Barcelona: Crítica, 2001).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Don Quixote, translated by John Rutherford (London:
Penguin, 2000).
Cervantes, Miguel de. El rufián dichoso/Pedro de Urdemalas, edited by Jenaro
Talens y Nicholas Spadaccini (Madrid: Cátedra, 1986).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Entremeses, edited by Nicholas Spadaccini (Madrid:
Cátedra, 1987).
Cervantes, Miguel de. La Galatea, edited by Francisco López Estraday María
Teresa López García-Berdoy (Madrid: Cátedra, 1995).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Viage del Parnaso/Poesías varias, edited by Elias L. Rivers
(Madrid: Espasa-Calpe, 1991).
Close, Anthony. Cervantes and the Comic Mind of his Age (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2000).
Cotarelo y Mori, Emilio, editor, Bibliografía de las controversias sobre la licitud del
teatro en España (Madrid: RABM, 1904).
Elliott, J. H. Imperial Spain, 1469–1716 (London: Arnold, 1963).
Fernández de Avellaneda, Alonso. El ingenioso hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha,
edited by Marcelino Menéndez Pelayo (Mexico City: Porrúa, 1986).
Friedman, Edward H. The Unifying Concept: Approaches to the Structure of
Cervantes’s comedias (York, S.C.: Spanish Literature Publications, 1981).
García Reidy, Alejandro. Las musas rameras: oficio dramático y conciencia
profesional en Lope de Vega (Madrid: Iberoamericana, 2013).
González Maestro, Jesús G. La escena imaginaria: poética del teatro de Miguel de
Cervantes (Madrid/Frankfurt: Iberoamericana/Vervuert, 2000).
Henry, Melanie. The Signifying Self: Cervantine Drama as Counter-Perspective
Aesthetic (London: Modern Humanities Research Association, 2013).
López Navío, José. ‘Génesis y desarrollo del Quijote’. Anales cervantinos 7
(1958): pp. 157–235.
McKendrick, Melveena. ‘Writings for the Stage’. In The Cambridge Companion to
Cervantes, edited by Anthony J. Cascardi (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2002), pp. 131–59.
Marín Cepeda, Patricia. Cervantes y la corte de Felipe II: escritores en el entorno de
Ascanio Colonna (1560–1608) (Madrid: Polifemo, 2015).
Millé y Giménez. Juan. Sobre la génesis del Quijote. Cervantes, Lope, Góngora, el
Romancero general, el Entremés de los romances, etc. (Barcelona: Araluce,
1930).
Pedraza Jiménez, Felipe B. Cervantes y Lope de Vega: historia de una enemistad y
otros estudios cervantinos (Barcelona: Octaedro, 2006).
Shergold, N. D. ‘Ganassa and the Commedia dell’Arte in Sixteenth-Century
Spain’. Modern Language Review 51 (1956): pp. 359–68.
Thacker, Jonathan. A Companion to Golden Age Theatre (Woodbridge: Tamesis,
2007).
Thacker, Jonathan. ‘“Véote, y no te conozco”: the unrecognizable form of
Cervantes’s El rufián dichoso’, Hispanic Research Journal 10 (2009): pp. 206–
26.
Trambaioli, Marcella. ‘Una protocomedia burlesca de Cervantes: La casa de los
celos, parodia de algunas piezas del primer Lope de Vega’. In Cervantes y su
mundo, vol. I, edited by Eva and Kurt Reichenberger (Kassel: Reichenberger,
2004), pp. 407–38.
Vega, Lope de. Arte nuevo de hacer comedias en este tiempo, edited by Enrique
García Santo-Tomás (Madrid: Cátedra, 2006).
Vega, Lope de. Cartas, edited by Nicolás Marín (Madrid: Castalia, 1985).
Vega, Lope de. La Arcadia, edited by Edwin S. Morby (Madrid: Castalia, 1975).
Vega, Lope de. La Dorotea, edited by Edwin S. Morby (Madrid: Castalia, 1968).
Vega, Lope de. Lírica, edited by José Manuel Blecua (Madrid: Castalia, 1981).
Vega, Lope de. La viuda valenciana, edited by Teresa Ferrer Valls (Madrid:
Castalia, 2001).
Vega, Lope de. Los cautivos de Argel, edited by Natalio Ohanna (Barcelona:
Castalia, 2017)
Vega, Lope de. Novelas a Marcia Leonarda, edited by Antonio Carreño (Madrid:
Cátedra, 2002).
Wright, Elizabeth. Pilgrimage to Patronage: Lope de Vega and the Court of Philip
III, 1598–1621 (Lewisburg: Bucknell University Press, 2001).
Zimic, Stanislav. ‘Cervantes frente a Lope y la comedia nueva (observaciones
sobre La entretenida)’. Anales Cervantinos 15 (1976): pp. 19–119.
1 Cervantes, Viage del Parnaso, p. 201. All translations are mine unless
otherwise noted.
2 Vega, Novelas…, p. 106.
3 Elliott, p. 217.
4 Cervantes, Entremeses, p. 91.
5 Shergold, p. 368. We know, from his trial for libel in 1587–8, that Lope
spent time in the theatre watching the Italian actors (see Thacker, A
Companion…, p. 4).
6 See Pedraza, pp. 25–8.
7 Cervantes, La Galatea, pp. 572–3.
8 Lope was not one of the writers who wrote laudatory verses for the
publication of the Galatea, though he was at least on the fringes of the circle of
writers—which included Cervantes—examined by Marín Cepeda, ‘hombres de
letras que formaban un grupo literario en torno al futuro cardenal italiano
Ascanio Colonna’ [‘men of letters who formed a literary circle around the future
Italian cardinal Ascanio Colonna’] (p. 13).
9 Vega, Arcadia, p. 425.
10 See Ferrer’s introduction to Vega, La viuda, pp. 22–3.
11 Vega, La viuda, ll. 846–51.
12 See Pedraza, pp. 22–4, for details and some of the texts.
13 For Lope’s strategic publishing and courtly ambitions of this period, see
Wright.
14 See Pedraza, pp. 28–30, for the full text of the sonnet and critical
speculation surrounding it.
15 García Reidy, p. 90.
16 Cervantes, Entremeses, p. 93.
17 Cervantes, Entremeses, p. 93.
18 Vega, Cartas, p. 68.
19 The two studies that suggest as much are by Millé y Giménez and López
Navío. Their different theories are discussed by Pedraza, pp. 63–77, who, whilst
sceptical of the detail, does believe that Lope’s hostile reaction to Don Quixote
can be explained by parallels between himself and the parodic protagonist of
the novel. Examples of the ballads from the 1580s in which Lope dramatizes
himself (and for which he was mocked) can be found in Vega, Lírica, pp. 70–81.
See also Close, p. 346.
20 Cervantes, Don Quijote, p. 555 and p. 553. Translations from Don Quixote
are taken from Rutherford’s version, Don Quixote, p. 445 and p. 444.
21 Cervantes, Don Quijote, pp. 555–6; p. 446.
22 Close, p. 97. See Rico’s edition of Don Quijote for elucidation and
discussion of the first of the preliminary verses, ‘Al libro Don Quijote de la
Mancha, Urganda la desconocida’, which includes attacks on Lope’s
presumption and pseudo-erudition (Cervantes, Don Quijote, pp. 21–4).
23 Cervantes, Don Quijote, p. 11; p. 12.
24 Close, p. 99.
25 Close, p. 116.
26 Both sonnets are reproduced in full and discussed in Pedraza, from where
sections of them are cited (pp. 34–40). Whether Cervantes wrote the first one or
not, the rejoinder has him in its sights.
27 Cervantes, Viage del Parnaso, pp. 202–3.
28 Vega, La Dorotea, p. 325. As we have already seen Lope also praised
Cervantes’s abilities as a novela writer in 1621 when he assayed the form
himself at the behest of his last great love, Marta de Nevares.
29 McKendrick, p. 131.
30 See García Reidy, especially Chapters 2 and 3, on the economics of the
theatre in the Golden Age.
31 Cervantes, Entremeses, p. 92. La batalla naval is now lost.
32 McKendrick, p. 131.
33 See Thacker, A Companion…, pp. 18–20.
34 See Henry, pp. 1–14 and Thacker, ‘“Véote…”’, pp. 206–11, for fuller
discussions of critical responses to Cervantes’s theatre and relevant
bibliography. Indeed, on at least one occasion, in 1599, Lope seems to have
used one of Cervantes’s early plays, El trato de Argel, as a source for his own Los
cautivos de Argel. In his introduction, the modern editor of Lope’s play, Natalio
Ohanna, calls this engagement ‘el más prolongado diálogo intertextual entre dos
de las figuras mayores de las letras áureas’, Vega, Los cautivos…, pp. 14–15.
35 Close, p. 98.
36 Close, p. 112.
37 Cervantes, Don Quijote, p. 554; pp. 444–5.
38 Cervantes, Don Quijote, p. 553; p. 444.
39 McKendrick, p. 131.
40 Henry, p. 6.
41 Vega, Arte nuevo, p. 15.
42 See Thacker, A Companion…, pp. 59–61, for a fuller discussion of these
aspects of the play.
43 Cervantes, Pedro de Urdemalas, ll. 3169–70.
44 See Thacker, ‘“Véote…”’, for an in-depth examination of Cervantes’s aims
in this play.
45 Zimic, p. 118.
46 Trambaioli, p. 417.
47 Trambaioli, p. 425.
48 Trambaioli, p. 421.
49 See Close, p. 111. The text of Argensola’s anti-theatre submission to Philip
II can be found in Cotarelo, pp. 65–8.
50 Cervantes, Viage…, p. 202.
51 González Maestro, p. 363.
52 Henry, p. 128.
53 In the prologue to his Ocho comedias. See Cervantes, Entremeses, p. 93.
54 See Pedraza, pp. 50–5.
55 Pedraza, p. 55.
56 Fernández de Avellaneda, p. 7.
57 Cervantes, Viage…, p. 90. In his footnote to the lines, Rivers calls this a
‘breve alabanza rutinaria’ [‘short routine praise’].
58 Fernández de Avellaneda, p. 7.
59 Fernández de Avellaneda, p. 8.
60 Cervantes, Don Quijote, p. 618.
61 In his La hermosura de Angélica of 1602, and cited by Pedraza, p. 57.
Chapter 25
Cervantes and Other Literary Circles
Victoria Ríos Castaño
Coventry University
Upon arriving in Milan, Periandro, one of the pilgrims of Los trabajos
de Persiles y Sigismunda, sets himself the task of locating the Academia
de los Entronados [Academy of the Enthroned]. With tongue in cheek,
Cervantes refers to the famed Italian Accademia degli Intronati of Siena
[Academy of the Dazed] for, in wrongly translating ‘Intronati’ as
‘Entronados’ on the basis of the words’ phonetic resemblance rather
than sense-for-sense, he makes Periandro bestow upon the members of
said academy an aura of seriousness and royal dignity, with which
Cervantes took issue. In this chapter, his mocking allusion to the
‘Intronati’ is drawn on as a point of departure to explore the world of
the academies he attended himself. With this aim in mind, the study
begins by taking a glimpse at the manner in which Cervantes ridicules
these literary circles in some of his texts and ends up focusing on his
long narrative poem the Viaje del Parnaso and its epilogue, ‘Adjunta al
Parnaso’, which tells the story of a fictional letter sent by Apollo to
Cervantes.1 The comments that Cervantes furnished in both texts
prompt a reconstruction of the academies that he frequented and
enable an examination of the relationship that he maintained with
contemporary poets, playwrights, artists, noble patrons, and book
censors.
The Spanish literary academies that sprang up at the turn of the
sixteenth century, following the Italian academies as a model,
consolidated in main cities like Barcelona, Madrid, Seville, Toledo,
Valencia, Valladolid, and Zaragoza. Celebrated at the behest of a noble
patron who provided a gathering place on a regular or permanent
basis, these small republics of letters implemented constitutions and
bylaws, as approved by their presiding officers and respected by their
hierarchical body of members, including the adoption of fictitious
names and a fixed time for meetings. During these sessions, generally
an evening per week, members engaged in the reciting and discussion
of poetry on previously prescribed verse forms and assigned topics,
which ranged from mystic love and mythology to lighter, more
frivolous matters.2
This seemingly civilized nature and ruled development of themes,
rather than giving way to a noble and dignified enclave for erudite and
polished writings, as Cervantes’s character, Periandro, would have
expected, often resulted in conflicts and a dearth of literary reflection
and genuine originality. Two main reasons are to be adduced: the
ignorance exhibited by some members and their obligation to adhere to
strict norms, such as the servile imitation of works written by the
academies’ most remarkable members or by authors whom these
members claimed ought to be followed.3 For all its mediocre
production of literary pieces and at times ridiculous pomposity, it is,
nevertheless, the censorship, deep-seated envy, and ill-humoured
rivalries that eventually disturbed academies to the point of causing
their dissolution. In this respect, in two famous letters from 1612 to his
patron the Duke of Sessa, Lope de Vega lays bare the beginning of the
end of the Academia de Saldaña, held in Madrid by the Count of
Saldaña, Don Diego Gómez de Sandoval y Rojas. During the course of
its sessions, Lope de Vega writes, ‘se tiraron los bonetes dos
licenciados,…se 
mordieron 
poéticamente 
un 
licenciado 
Soto,
granadino, y el famoso Luis Vélez;…nunca Marte miró tan opuesto a las
señoras Musas’ [‘two graduates threw their caps at each other,…a
graduate from Granada, named Soto, and the famous Luis Vélez bit
each other poetically;…never did Mars look upon the Muses so
adversely’].4
Two other widely-known passages in which Cervantes lambasts the
world of the academies include an anecdote in El coloquio de los perros
(1613)—a story that also appears in Don Quixote II.71—and the
framing poems with which the first part of Don Quixote begins and
ends. In the first case, Berganza recounts that a certain poet, named
Mauleón: ‘poeta tonto y académico de burla de la Academia de los
Imitadores’ [‘foolish poet and a mock academician of the Academy of
Imitators’], rendered Deum de Deo [‘God from God’] as ‘dé donde diere’,
which can be interpreted as ‘wherever it hits’.5 In the second case, the
reader finds that the final poems, in particular, comprising highly
comic laudatory verses for Don Quixote, Sancho, Dulcinea, and
Rocinante, are composed by the fictional members of the Academy of
Argamasilla: poets who, following the academies’ customs, adopt
amusing nicknames, such as Monicongo and Cachidiablo. Critics see in
their verses not only prime instances of Cervantes’s parody of the
academies but also his scorn of poetic contests, the justas poéticas or
certámenes. Aside from functioning as a noticeable springboard for
literary and social success, these poetic contests offered the members of
the academies an opportunity to enter into a public battle through their
poetic skill, wit, and sensitivity.6
Cervantes submitted poems to several of these justas. His
participation allowed him to become acquainted with one of his
patrons, Don Pedro Fernández de Castro y Andrade, seventh Count of
Lemos. In addition, his involvement in these contests attests to a period
of friendship with the brothers Lupercio Leonardo and Bartolomé
Leonardo de Argensola, to whom he sent a poem in honour of the
canonization of St Jacinto in Zaragoza in 1596, as well as a renewed
cordial relationship with Lope de Vega, who acted as member of the
jury of the justa celebrated in the church of the Padres Carmelitas
Descalzos [Discalced Carmelite Fathers] during the beatification of St
Teresa de Jesús in Madrid in 1613.7 Cervantes is also known to have
won at least one contest, in Madrid on the feast day of Corpus Christi in
1609, a victory that might not have convinced him of his poetic
mastery.8 After all, as he makes clear in Don Quixote II.18, members of
these juries were suspected to have awarded prizes moved by personal
interests rather than by literary merit. Hence, Don Quixote’s
conversation with Don Lorenzo de Miranda about some of the verses
that the young man had written, advising him that if they are for a
literary contest: ‘procure vuesa merced llevar el segundo premio; que el
primero siempre se lleva el favor o la gran calidad de la persona, el
segundo se le lleva la mera justicia, y el tercero viene a ser segundo, y
el primero, a esta cuenta, será el tercero’ [‘try, your grace, to win the
second prize, because the first one is always awarded to a person who
has been favoured or who is of important social status, and the second
is awarded to the one who rightly deserves it. Thus, the third comes to
be the second, and the first, following this calculation, will be the
third’].9
Cervantes’s caustic allusion and parody of the world of the
academies and the justas literarias where he interacted with the literary
circle of his time surfaces, above all, in the Viaje del Parnaso and its
epilogue, the ‘Adjunta al Parnaso’. The author and the narrator of the
poem is Cervantes, a fact that has led some scholars to argue for its
biographical implications, namely the use of his social and literary
experiences as a tool to exalt what constitutes the true beauty of
poetry, vindicate his disparaged work, and reappraise his status as a
poet.10 In fact, the reasons behind the composition of the Viaje del
Parnaso are grounded in Cervantes’s ins-and-outs of his literary circle.
In 1608, his patron, the Count of Lemos, was named Viceroy of Naples,
and his newly-appointed secretary, Lupercio Leonardo de Argensola,
took charge of selecting the Count’s men of letters in residence at the
Neapolitan court. In their self-interested selection, Lupercio Argensola
and his brother Bartolomé excluded poets whom they viewed as
potential rivals for the Count’s favour, inviting instead other poets of
unknown prestige and literary talent. A bitterly disappointed Cervantes,
who had received several promises by his friend Bartolomé, whom he
praises in La Galatea (1585) and through the priest’s mouth in the first
part of Don Quixote, lost this cherished opportunity to return to Italy,
where he had spent some years during his youth.11 Along with
Cervantes, three other reputed poets who felt humiliated by the
Argensolas’ devious list were Cristóbal Suárez de Figueroa, Góngora,
and Cristóbal de Mesa. The last two expressed their disapproval in
writing: Góngora in a sarcastic sonnet and Mesa in his laudatory poem
‘Al Conde de Lemos, yendo por Virrey a Nápoles’ [‘To the Count of
Lemos upon his departure to Naples as Viceroy’]. In this poem, aside
from complaining about the Argensolas’ decision, Mesa equates Lemos
with Apollo and Naples with Apollo’s home, Mount Parnassus, which
might have sown the first seeds of what eventually led Cervantes to his
writing of the Viaje del Parnaso. That is to say, Cervantes’s voyage is a
fictional compensation for the physical one on which he was not
invited. In recreating his own fictional academy and supplanting
Lupercio Argensola, he assumes the leading role, nominating and
selecting the swans, or good poets, against the crows, or poetasters, on
Apollo’s behalf.12
The list of poets that Cervantes cites, amounting to approximately
110 ingenios (those with an ability to invent and write), frames the
Viaje del Parnaso within the popular Spanish genre of the encomiastic
catalogue, which Cervantes initiates in his own writing with his ‘Canto
de Calíope’ of La Galatea.13 For Ellen Lokos, Cervantes re-appropriates
the genre as a mask behind which he tends, more often than not, to
pass judgement on his literary circle. For him, it was plagued by vulgar
and mediocre poetasters who have triggered the dismal failure of the
Spanish academies. In other words, what Cervantes puts into practice is
not the unequivocal laudatory nature of the encomiastic genre, but
rather Erasmus’s art of adoxography or paradoxical praise. Thus,
Cervantes eulogizes and, at the same time, finds fault with many of his
contemporaries’ poetry in the form of emblematic images, metaphorical
contradictions, and coded subtle language. What is more, the Viaje del
Parnaso is Cervantes’s parodic and critical transposition of academies
and literary contests to the realm of fiction. He engaged in a creative
exercise of his time, a popular genre that revolved around fictional
academies in which authors created, in either a burlesque or a serious
manner, a composite of their real experiences and their imagination.14
In this study, for the purpose of unveiling Cervantes’s literary circle, the
Viaje del Parnaso serves not only as a catalogue of contemporary
authors upon whom he passed judgement, but also as a chronicle of his
attendance of academies and his relationship with the members of
those he frequented in cities like Madrid, Seville, and Valladolid. Thus,
the following pages contextualize the real-life counterpart-academies of
the Viaje del Parnaso and examine in more detail the literary circle of
acquaintances, enemies, and friends with whom he rubbed shoulders.
Enjoying his recently-gained popularity thanks to the verses of La
Galatea, Cervantes’s first foray into the world of the academies might
have been in Madrid’s Academia de los Humildes de Villamanta
[Academy of the Humbled], founded in 1592, or, more likely, in the
Academia Imitatoria [Academy of the Art of Imitation], opened in
1584, and to which Cervantes alludes as the Academia de los
Imitadores [Academy of Imitators] in El coloquio de los perros. Both
academies functioned until the mid-seventeenth century and were only
interrupted when the royal court moved to Valladolid from 1601 to
1606. One of its members was Cervantes’s intimate friend, the poet
Juan Rufo, who notices in Las seiscientas apotegmas [The Six Hundred
Apothegms] (1596) that the Academia Imitatoria prided itself on
counting on exceedingly good poets and aristocrats, such as Lupercio
Argensola, with whom Cervantes would have been on good terms at the
time.15 During the two last decades of the sixteenth century, Cervantes
would have alternated his attendance between academies in Madrid
and in Seville, where he arrived for the first time in 1585, returning in
1587, and keeping residency from 1597 to 1602.16
Seville was a cosmopolitan place and centre of wealth from America,
a melting pot of merchants, sailors, migrants to the Indies, and ingenios
in search of broadening their economic and spiritual horizons. Literary
contests in honour of saints, which were held during the celebration of
religious festivities, were frequent and well-attended, such as the
festivals of San Francisco in 1591, Sacramento in 1593, San Roque in
1600, and San Pedro in 1604, amid many others. During this period at
least three institutions can be classified as academies; the first was led
by Don Juan de Arguijo, the second by the painter Francisco Pacheco,
and the third by Cervantes’s close friend, the graduate Juan de Ochoa.
In Ochoa’s academy, which was characterized, in opposition to
Arguijo’s aristocratic and humanistic gatherings, by its satirical verses,
Cervantes coincided with Mateo Alemán, Alonso Álvarez de Soria, and
Luis Vélez de Guevara.17 In Pacheco’s workshop, gatherings intertwined
recitals of poetry with the practice of painting, and Cervantes could
have met poet-painters like Pablo de Céspedes and Don Juan de
Jáuregui, and writers such as Francisco de Rioja, Baltasar de Alcázar,
and Juan de la Cueva.18
In the Viaje del Parnaso Cervantes acknowledges his acquaintance
with some of these young men at the time, such as the poet-patron
Arguijo, the poet and erudite archaeologist Rioja, and the poet-painter
Jáuregui. Arguijo and Rioja saw their works published after Cervantes’s
text, which indicates that he could have only known of them by
hearing them read in Seville’s academies or by word of mouth. Added
to this, the fact that Cervantes grants them the immortality of laureate
poets by citing them as members of the band of good ones means that
he foresaw or ‘discovered’ their potential before they achieved fame.19
As for the equally young Jáuregui, whom Cervantes might have met as
a teenager in Seville or as an adult during Jáuregui’s visits to Madrid,
between 1607 and 1616, Cervantes’s attitude comes across as
inconsistent. In the preface to his Novelas ejemplares he alludes to a
portrait that Jáuregui allegedly painted of him, the whereabouts of
which remain unknown. Nonetheless, in the Viaje del Parnaso Jáuregui
is praised solely as a poet. Noticeably, Jáuregui’s value as poet and
painter was recognized by Lope de Vega and Góngora. Cervantes fails
to do so, and yet, he presents another contemporary, Jerónimo de
Mora, as an outstanding master of both artistic skills.20
Another poet whom Cervantes met during his stays in Seville, and
whom he censures in the Viaje del Parnaso, is Pedro de Medinilla. This
poet represented three stereotypical characteristics that Cervantes
abhorred in literary circles; Medinilla composed verses in abundance
but without real quality, gained general sympathies because of his
smooth nature, and was the epitome of what Cervantes names
‘paniaguados’, those who lived off friends’ financial support.21 By
contrast, Cervantes has only good words for several poets whom he
befriended for the first time in Seville, such as the Marquis of Alcañices
Don Álvaro Antonio Enríquez de Almansa—a remarkable figure in the
courts of Philip II and Philip III who composed a sonnet for the Novelas
ejemplares—and two poets whom Cervantes first praises in his ‘Canto de
Calíope’: his ‘amigo’, as Cervantes calls him, Pedro Montesdoca and the
lawyer Don Francisco de la Cueva y Silva.22
Cervantes’s excellent relationship with other members of Seville’s
literary circle extended to Doctor Felipe Godínez, who specialized in
comedias de santos [comedies of saints], and, above all, the
aforementioned Cristóbal de Mesa, a mannerist poet whom Cervantes
equally exalted in the ‘Canto de Calíope’.23 Mesa, who was very well
connected with painter Francisco Pacheco’s workshop and academy,
possibly introduced Cervantes to other high-society poets of the city. In
this sense, and taking issue with Cervantine expert Francisco Rodríguez
Marín, who claims that, in Seville, Cervantes was a poor devil who
surrounded himself by people of little renown, Miguel Herrero García
holds that Cervantes’s friendship with Mesa and his religious and
literary circle won him participation in marked social events. For
example, Cervantes’s poem ‘Al túmulo de Felipe II’ was selected to be
read in public, and published as part of an edition of poems extolling
the ostentatious construction that had been erected close to the
cathedral of Seville in order to honour Philip II in 1598.24
Back in Madrid, from around 1606 until his death, Cervantes
enjoyed the patronage of the Count of Lemos and the Archbishop of
Toledo, Bernardo de Sandoval, becoming an admired and prominent
figure in the capital’s literary academies.25 It is known, for example,
that a number of acquaintances, including Vicente Gómez Martínez
Espinel, Quevedo, Alonso Jerónimo de Salas Barbadillo, and Vélez de
Guevara requested his admission to the literary academy of the
Congregación del Santísimo Sacramento [Congregation of the Most
Saintly Sacrament], founded by Archbishop Sandoval and the Duke of
Lerma.26 Cervantes also coincided with all these authors in the
Academia de Saldaña, which was established by the Count of Saldaña,
second son to the Duke of Lerma, in 1605, and reopened again in
November 1611, on the occasion of rendering homage to Queen
Margarita of Austria upon her death.27
Evidence of Cervantes’s attendance to this academy is furnished by
three of its members. Lope de Vega writes in a famous letter to the
Duke of Sessa about Cervantes’s glasses—‘yo leí unos versos con unos
anteojos de Zerbantes que parecían huevos estrellados mal hechos’ [‘I
read some verses with Zerbantes’s spectacles, which looked like badly-
fried eggs’]—, and Juan Pérez de Guzmán notes the comedian Andrés
de Claramonte y Corroy’s superior gift of the gab in the presence of
patrons and nobles, in comparison with ‘Miguel de Cervantes, Lope de
Vega Carpio o Luis Vélez de Guevara, que también a ella concurrían’
[‘who also attended it’]. Claramonte y Corroy composed a romance
listing the names of the academy’s members; ingenios like ‘Lope,
Quevedo, Cervantes’ who, when not reading weekly compositions,
would have heard and discussed those by:
Liñán de Riaza, Góngora, Salas de Barbadillo, D. Gaspar de Teves, el
valenciano [Valencian] Águila, Hernando de Biezna, D. Pedro de
Mendoza, Anastasio Pantaleón de Ribera, Ledesma, Gabriel de
Barrionuevo, D. Francisco Vivanco, el sevillano [Sevillian] Rioja, el
portugués [Portuguese] Silveira, Argensola, Mendieta, el licenciado [the
graduate] Riche, el jurista [the jurist] Don Francisco de la Cueva y
Silva…[and] Julián de Armendáriz.28
The climate of hostility and rivalry between some of these ingenios
provoked a schism that was aggravated by Soto de Rojas and Vélez de
Guevara’s brawl, and it ensued that many of them moved to the newly-
open Academia del Parnaso [Academy of Parnassus]. Eventually
renamed as Academia Selvaje [Savage Academy], in allusion to the first
surname of its host Don Francisco de Silva y Mendoza, the meetings
were held in his palace, on Atocha Street, from April 1612 to the
summer of 1614, when he left to fight in Lombardy.29 According to
Lokos, the duration of this Academia del Parnaso or Selvaje coincides
with Cervantes’s writing period of the Viaje del Parnaso and its
‘Adjunta’, a time during which, motivated by his own experiences in
the Parnaso academy, he embarked on a satire of Spanish academies in
general.30 In fact, in these two texts Cervantes alludes to many of the
aforementioned poets and patrons as well as to other men whom he
read, met, or heard of in the Madrid academies. What is pertinent to
this study is that his comments allow us an appreciation of his literary
circle, the relationships that he maintained with peers and aristocrats,
and how they contributed or impinged upon his work.
To begin with, in the Viaje del Parnaso Cervantes takes the
opportunity not only to satirize but also to flatter and express his
gratitude to aprobadores de obras [approvers of works for publication]
and influential men and aristocrats, who fostered literary academies
and were vital in writers’ ascension or descent within the social and
literary ladder. Thus, amid those who could have granted—and who
eventually did grant—him printing approvals, Cervantes names the
Trinitarian Fray Juan Baptista Capataz, an ‘aprobante’ of poetry,
theatre, and religious books, and José de Valdivieso, a poet and priest
from Toledo who authorized the publication of the Ocho comedias y
ocho entremeses, the second part of Don Quixote, and Los trabajos de
Persiles y Sigismunda.31
As for members of the aristocracy, Cervantes makes reference to,
among others, the Marquis of Alcañices, who, as previously noted,
wrote a sonnet for the Novelas ejemplares. Cervantes also praises the
patron of the Academia Selvaje, Silva y Mendoza, as ‘Este gran
caballero, que se inclina/a la lección de los poetas buenos,/y al sacro
monte con su luz camina’ [‘This great gentleman, who favours the good
poets’ lessons, and who walks with his guiding light to the sacred
mountain’].32 Likewise, Cervantes devotes a section to four poet-
aristocrats: the Count of Saldaña, the Count of Salinas (Don Diego de
Silva y Mendoza), the Prince of Esquilache (Don Francisco de Borja y
Aragón), and the Count of Villamediana (Don Juan de Tassis y
Peralta).33 Noticeably, although Cervantes felt obliged to render
homage to these men because of their social rank, influential power,
and support, as in the case of the Count of Saldaña, he also felt the
need to convey that those in their position could afford to write low-
quality poetry. By way of example, in his laudatory verses to Saldaña,
Cervantes centres on his present and future merits, rather than on past
ones, and instead of portraying him as a truly select poet, worthy of
entering the Parnassus, Cervantes is selective in what he says—in the
same way as he does with the poet-painter Jáuregui—merely alluding
to his role as protector and patron.34
Needless to say, in his Viaje del Parnaso Cervantes did not ignore the
‘prince of the academies’, Lope de Vega, and the other two literary
giants (and bitter enemies) of the period. For Quevedo and Góngora,
whose verses Cervantes must have heard in the academies and read in
manuscript form, he only has good words.35 Cervantes calls the former
no less than ‘hijo de Apolo’ [‘Apollo’s son’], and dedicates to the latter
one of the most heart-warming and eloquent praises in the Viaje del
Parnaso, welcoming the validity of Baroque poetry to supersede
Garcilaso’s conventional Petrarchan style.36 Alongside these laureate
poets, Cervantes interacted with other conflictive personalities, such as
Salas Barbadillo and Espinel, to whom he refers as ‘poetas maldicientes’
[slanderers] or authors whom one was better off to have as friends
rather than as enemies, given their reputation as severe critics and
biting censors at the literary circles they often visited.37 In his Diversas
rimas [Diverse Rhymes] (1591), Espinel had incorporated Cervantes as a
relevant historical and literary figure, and it is likely that Cervantes
wished to reciprocate. The fact that Cervantes qualifies him as
‘maldiciente’ seems to be at odds with an intention not to displease
him, unless Espinel himself boasted about it as a personal trait or
Cervantes had ceased to care about his reaction.
Practicalities and enmity aside, in his work, Cervantes also tends to
bring readers’ attention to authors he had befriended throughout his
life; poets who go under pseudonyms in the ‘Canto de Calíope’, or who
are present by their real name in the Viaje del Parnaso and in the first
part of Don Quixote. One is the Sevillian poet and grammarian Juan de
Ochoa, who ran the academy frequented by Cervantes, and to whom he
devotes four encomiastic tercets of the Viaje del Parnaso, branding him
as friend, ‘poeta y Cristiano verdadero’ [‘poet and true Christian’].
Another is Juan Rufo, author of the epic poem La Austríada (1584),
about Don Juan de Austria and the Battle of Lepanto, which Cervantes
considered to be a masterpiece to be saved from the fire in Don Quixote
I.6.38 Cervantes and Rufo possibly met in an academy—it is thanks to
Rufo that we know about the Academia Imitatoria, to which Cervantes
alludes in El coloquio de los perros—and might have coincided in the
increasingly-popular corrales de comedias [comedy theatres], which
Rufo promoted in order to obtain funding for hospitals.39
Rufo’s philanthropic role puts us in mind of another literary circle
with which Cervantes mixed outside the academies: the theatrical
world. 
From 
his 
early 
adolescence 
Cervantes 
witnessed 
the
development of Baroque comedy, a spectacle with growing profits and
seemingly unstoppable success. The craftsmen who initiated this
phenomenon by representing their respective guilds in civil and
religious festivities eventually became autores de comedias [theatre
owners/producers] and theatrical impresarios, who turned drama into
a professional activity.40 It seems as if during the first half of the 1580s,
Cervantes’s social and literary world revolved not so much around
literary academies but around theatre producers, playwrights,
theatrical impresarios, and actors, whom Cervantes was to remember
later in his works. Thus, he includes playwrights such as Andrés de
Angulo in his second part of Don Quixote and in El coloquio de los perros;
Nicolás de los Ríos in Pedro de Urdemalas; and Cristóbal de Virués and
Andrés Rey de Artieda in the ‘Canto de Calíope’—they represent Crisio
and Artidoro, respectively—and in the Viaje del Parnaso. In the latter,
Cervantes similarly praises playwright-impresarios like Lope de Rueda
and Pedro de Morales. Rueda, highly celebrated because of his
comedies, must have inspired Cervantes as a teenager—they also
happened to be neighbours in San Miguel (Sevilla). Later on in life,
aside from eulogizing him in the Viaje del Parnaso, Cervantes makes his
fictional captives restage a pastoral colloquium attributed to Rueda in
Los baños de Argel.41 As for Morales, who was a poet, an actor, and the
theatre director of his own company, he supported Cervantes in his
attempts to write for the stage, which is why Cervantes manifests his
gratitude to him on two occasions.42 In the second chapter of the Viaje
del Parnaso, he makes this frank and demonstrative confession: ‘Este
que de las Musas es recreo,/la gracia y el donaire y la cordura/…es
Pedro de Morales/…y es asilo/adonde se repara mi ventura’ [‘This one
who is the Muses’ delight, grace and finesse, and good sense […] is
Pedro de Morales /…and is the sanctuary where my fortune takes
shelter’].43 Likewise, in Chapter 8, when wishing farewell to some
poets, Cervantes repeats his affectionate remark: ‘el alma, el corazón, la
mano/di a Pedro de Morales y un abrazo’ [‘my soul, my heart, my
hand, I gave to Pedro de Morales, and a hug’].44
In opposition to these kind-hearted words to his friend, Cervantes
resorts to either making subtle scathing remarks about his rivals or to
omitting them from the army of good poets of the Viaje del Parnaso.
Generally speaking, it must have been envy and irascible temperaments
within the world of the academies, which triggered spiteful comments
towards his work, and his poetry in particular, that caused Cervantes’s
aversion towards some members of his literary circle.45 Cervantes
appears to allude to these confrontations in the second part of Don
Quixote, when making its protagonist condemn envy in these terms:
‘¡Oh envidia, raíz de infinitos males y carcoma de las virtudes! Todos
los vicios, Sancho, traen un no sé qué de deleite consigo, pero el de la
envidia no trae sino disgustos, rancores, y rabias’ [‘Oh, envy, root of
endless misfortunes and woodworm of virtues! In every vice, Sancho,
there is just something pleasurable, but envy can only bring discontent,
resentment, and rage’]. Likewise, Cervantes puts in Sancho’s mouth his
thoughts on the backbiting and calumnies that were expressed against
him: ‘Pero digan lo que quisieren, que desnudo nací, desnudo me hallo:
ni pierdo ni gano…, que digan de mí todo lo que quisieren’ [‘Indeed
they can say as they wish, because I was born naked and remain naked.
Neither loose I nor win…, they can say about me anything they
want’].46
Interestingly, Cervantes points to himself as the target of envy and
ignorance in the fourth chapter of the Viaje del Parnaso, when
lamenting that his poetry lacks recognition: ‘envidiado siempre y
perseguido,/el bien que espera por jamás consigue’ [‘always envied and
harassed, he never achieves the benefits he expects’].47 In the second
chapter, it is also the sin or vicio of envy on which Cervantes draws to
characterize one of his nemeses, of whom he states: ‘Es de Calatayud su
sobrenombre./Con esto queda dicho todo cuanto/puedo decir con que a
la invidia asombre’ [‘His nickname is from Calatayud. This said, it is all
I can say to astonish he who is clouded by envy’].48 Behind his cutting
presentation Cervantes might be concealing the Aragonese poet Pedro
Liñán de Riaza, friend of Lope de Vega and Góngora. Earlier in his life,
Cervantes had befriended him and another group of poets including
Gabriel López de Maldonado and Pedro Padilla. Indicative of
Cervantes’s good relationship with them is that he cited Padilla’s Tesoro
de varias poesías [Treasure of Several Poems] (1580) and López de
Maldonado’s El cancionero [The Collection of Verse] (1586) in Don
Quixote, Part I, and that he dedicated warm verses to López de
Maldonado and Liñán de Riaza in the ‘Canto de Calíope’.49 Later on,
however, his friendship with Liñán de Riaza turned sour, and critics see
in him one of the co-authors, together with Baltasar Elisio de Medinilla
and Lope de Vega, of the infamous apocryphal Quixote by Avellaneda.50
In the Viaje del Parnaso, two other potential writers behind
Avellaneda’s Quixote are named: Alonso de Ledesma and Cristóbal
Suárez de Figueroa. Ledesma, ridiculed in the third chapter, was a poet
from Segovia who composed severely extravagant religious verses.51 As
for Cervantes and Suárez de Figueroa’s relationship, the reason why
they fell out remains unknown. Cervantes welcomes his pastoral
romance La constante Amarilis [The Constant Amarilis] (1609) in the
second chapter, and Suárez de Figueroa praises Cervantes in his Plaza
universal de todas ciencias y artes [Universal Square of Every Science and
Art] (1615). However, two years later, in El pasajero [The Passenger]
(1617), Suárez de Figueroa bitterly attacks Cervantes, criticizing not
only his poetry but also, in a general allusion, those who composed
comedies despite their failure to get them performed, verses in their
dotage (the Viaje del Parnaso), and a romance on the point of death (Los
trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda).52
Of special interest is the manner in which Cervantes treats another
nemesis, Francisco López de Úbeda, author of La pícara Justina [The
Spanish Jilt] (1605). Their difficult relationship dates back to the almost
simultaneous publication of their acclaimed novels. Both writers had
learnt in advance of their competitor’s work in literary academies or,
once the manuscripts had been handed in for publication, through
word of mouth of indiscreet publishers and ‘aprobantes’. This would
explain the passage of La pícara Justina in which López de Úbeda makes
his protagonist claim that she is ‘[m]ás famo[sa] que doña Oli(va),/que
Don Quixo(te) y Lazari(llo),/que Alfarach[e] y Celestin[a]’ [‘more
famous than Lady Oliva, than Don Quixote and Lazarillo, than
Alfarache and Celestina’].53 Taking his turn, Cervantes censures him in
the Viaje del Parnaso, branding him as ‘capellán lego del contrario
bando’ [‘layman chaplain of the opposite band’].54 Cervantes’s epithet
of ‘capellán lego’ is not a reference to López de Úbeda’s religious
condition, for he was a layman physician, but a derogatory manner of
naming those who practised for wealthy and influential families.55
Cervantes fictionalizes him as an unreasonable and irascible man who
attacks the good poets and hurts, in particular, Philip II and Philip III’s
‘secretario de lenguas’ [translator], poet, and book censor Tomás
Gracián, by hurling at him ‘su librazo’ [‘his big book’].56 Here,
Cervantes appears to have re-enacted a real-life event, that is, López de
Úbeda’s fit of rage because Gracián had not signed off the approval for
his novel.57 Their confrontations aside, according to Marcel Bataillon,
Cervantes’s dislike of López de Úbeda rests on the displeasure that the
picaresque genre caused him, thus explaining the absence in the Viaje
del Parnaso of the genre’s leading figure, Mateo Alemán, whom
Cervantes had first met in the Sevillian academies.
Cervantes’s indifference towards several authors in his long poem is
an open invitation to discuss them as opponents. Such is the case of
Pedro de Espinosa and Esteban Manuel de Villegas. Espinosa had
snubbed him in Flores de poetas ilustres de España [Flowers of
Distinguished Poets of Spain] (1605), a collection of selected poems in
which Espinosa did not judge Cervantes’s poetry worthy enough of
merit to be incorporated in the volume.58 As for Villegas, he vented his
bile against Cervantes in these verses of the Eróticas o amatorias [Erotic
and Love Poetry] (1618): ‘Irás del Helicón a la conquista/mejor que el
mal poeta de Cervantes,/donde no le valdrá ser quijotista’ [‘You will go
from Helicon to the conquest, better than that bad poet, Cervantes, who
will not take advantage there of being a “quijotista”’].59 It is worth
noting Villega’s use of the adjective ‘quijotista’, which perhaps meant
insulting Cervantes as delusional or acknowledging him merely as a
writer, only on the basis of his prose. As a poet, overshadowed by much
more celebrated authors like Lope de Vega, Cervantes was less
respected by his peers, an attitude that triggered enmity because he
considered himself wrongly attacked or disrespected, the victim of
surreptitious envy. This jealousy also affected his economic and social
circumstances dramatically; for example, it hindered his theatrical
productions from getting off the ground, and thwarted his hopes of
becoming one of the Count of Lemos’s men of letters in residence at the
Neapolitan court. In any case, animosity and disdainful regard towards
another author’s work was not unidirectional and exclusively centred
on Cervantes, for as this chapter has exposed, Cervantes himself had his
own issues not only with poets whose value he discredited but also
with writers like Alemán, seemingly for cultivating the picaresque
genre. What is more, rivalries and entrenched hatred among literary
peers, inside or outside the academic circles, were the order of the day;
part and parcel of situations created by ‘slanderers’ like Salas
Barbadillo and Espinel and by confrontational characters like López de
Úbeda and Vélez de Guevara. Many of them, with the help of friends
and despite their enemies, aspired to secure recognition and succeed in
the literary arena. In Cervantes’s case, this chapter has mentioned that
his cordial relationship with prominent ingenios of Seville ensured his
appreciation as a poet in public commemorations, whilst his praise of
poets and other influential men, such as aristocratic patrons and book
censors, paved the way to reciprocal encomiastic comments and, at
times, to the obtaining of support for his publications.
Works Cited
Bajona Oliveras, Ignacio. ‘La amistad de Cervantes con Pedro de Padilla’. Anales
Cervantinos 5 (1955–56): pp. 231–41.
Bataillon, Marcel. ‘Relaciones literarias’. In Suma cervantina, edited by Juan
Bautista Avalle-Arce and Edward C. Riley (London: Tamesis, 1973), pp. 215–
32.
Brown, Kenneth. Anastasio Pantaleón de Ribera (1600–1629): Ingenioso miembro
de la república literaria española (Madrid: Studia Humanitatis, 1980).
Canavaggio, Jean. Cervantes, translated by Mauro Armiño (Madrid: Espasa-
Calpe, 1987).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. El ingenioso hidalgo don Quixote de la Mancha
(1605). 
http://miguelde.cervantes.com/pdf/
Don%20Quijote%201%20parte.pdf.
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. La Galatea, edited by Rodolfo Schevill and
Adolfo Bonilla y San Martín (Madrid: Imprenta de Bernardo Rodríguez,
1914).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda, edited by
Juan Bautista Avalle-Arce (Madrid: Castalia, 1969).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Ocho comedias y ocho entremeses nuevos, nunca
representados, edited by Florencio Sevilla Arroyo (Alicante: Biblioteca Virtual
Miguel 
de 
Cervantes, 
2001). 
http://www.cervantesvirtual.com/nd/
ark:/59851/bmc9g5k1.
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Segunda parte del ingenioso caballero don Quixote
de la Mancha, introduction and notes by Guillermo Araya (Chile: Editorial
Universitaria, 1975).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Three Exemplary Novels/Tres novelas ejemplares:
A Dual Language Book, edited and translated by Stanley Appelbaum (Mineola,
New York: Dover Publications, 2006).
Cervantes 
Saavedra, 
Miguel 
de. 
Viaje 
del 
Parnaso 
(1614). 
http://
miguelde.cervantes.com/pdf/Viaje%20del%20Parnaso.pdf.
Close, Anthony J. A Companion to Don Quixote (Woodbridge: Tamesis, 2008).
Close, Anthony J. ‘A Poet’s Vanity: Thoughts on the Friendly Ethos of
Cervantine Satire’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 13,
no. 1 (1993): pp. 31–63.
Cruz, Anne J. ‘Las academias: Literatura y poder en un espacio cortesano’. Edad
de Oro 17 (1998): pp. 49–57.
Egido, Aurora. Fronteras de la poesía en el barroco (Barcelona: Crítica editorial,
1990).
Espín Rodrigo, Enrique. El Quijote de Avellaneda fue obra del doctor Christoval
Svarez de Figueroa (Tarragona: Casa de Felipe Roberto, 1993).
Espinel, Vicente Gómez Martínez. Diversas rimas, edited by Alberto Navarro
González and Pilar González Velasco (Salamanca: Publicaciones de la
Universidad, 1980).
Espinosa, Pedro de. Flores de poetas ilustres de España, edited by Inoria Pepe
Sarno and José María Reyes Cano (Madrid: Cátedra, 2006).
Fernández de Avellaneda, Alonso. El ingenioso hidalgo don Quijote de la Mancha,
edited by Fernando García Salinero (Madrid: Castalia, 1988).
Gaos, Vicente. ‘Edición, introducción y notas’. In Poesía completa I by Miguel de
Cervantes Saavedra, edited by Gaos (Madrid: Clásicos Castalia, 1973).
Gracia García, Jordi. ‘Viaje del Parnaso: Un ensayo de interpretación’. In Actas
del Primer Coloquio Internacional de la Asociación de Cervantistas (Barcelona:
Anthropos, 1990): pp. 333–48.
Herrero García, Miguel. ‘Estudio preliminar’. In Viaje del Parnaso by Miguel de
Cervantes Saavedra, edited by Herrero García (Madrid: CSIC, Clásicos
Hispánicos, 1983).
King, Willard F. Prosa novelística y academias literarias en el siglo XVII (Madrid:
Anejos del Boletín de la Real Academia Española, 1963).
King, Willard F. ‘The Academies and Seventeenth-Century Spanish Literature’,
Publications of the Modern Language Association 75, no. 4 (1960): pp. 367–76.
Lokos, Ellen D. The Solitary Journey: Cervantes’s Voyage to Parnassus (New York:
Peter Lang, 1991).
López de Maldonado, Gabriel. El cancionero (Madrid: Casa de Guillermo Droy,
1586).
López de Úbeda, Francisco. La pícara Justina, edited by Bruno M. Damiani
(Madrid: Turanzas, 1982).
Mancing, Howard. The Cervantes Encyclopedia, 2 vols (Westport: Greenwood
Press, 2004).
Márquez Villanueva, Francisco. Trabajos y días cervantinos (Alcalá de Henares:
Centro de Estudios Cervantinos, 1995).
Martín, Adrienne Laskier. Cervantes and the Burlesque Sonnet (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1991).
Mesa, Cristóbal de. Églogas y geórgicas de Virgilio (Madrid: Imprenta de R. Ruiz,
1973).
Mesa, Cristóbal de. Rimas, edited by Ricardo Senabre Sempere (Badajoz:
Diputación Provincial, 1991).
Montoto, Santiago. Justas poéticas sevillanas del siglo XVI (1532–1542) (Valencia:
Castalia, 1955).
Padilla, Pedro de. Tesoro de varias poesías, edited by Virgilio López Lemus
(México: Frente de Afirmación Hispanista, 2006).
Rivers, Elias L. ‘Viaje del Parnaso y poesías sueltas’. In Suma Cervantina, edited
by J. Bautista Avalle-Arce and E. C. Riley (London: Tamesis, 1973), pp. 119–
46.
Rufo, Juan. La Austríada (Madrid: Casa de Alonso Gómez, 1584).
Rufo, Juan. Las seiscientas apotegmas y otras obras en verso, edited by Alberto
Blecua (Madrid: Espasa-Calpe, 1972).
Sánchez, José. Academias literarias del Siglo de Oro español (Madrid: Gredos,
1961).
Sánchez Portero, Antonio. ‘Cervantes desveló en clave la identidad de
Avellaneda’. Lemir: Revista de Literatura Española Medieval y del Renacimiento
11 (2007): pp. 121–33.
Santos de la Morena, Blanca. ‘Cervantes recreado por sí mismo en el Viaje del
Parnaso: Reflexiones sobre su concepto de poesía’. In Recreaciones quijotescas y
cervantinas en la narrativa, edited by Carlos Mata Induráin (Pamplona: Eunsa,
2013), pp. 305–12.
Sanz Ayán, Carmen. ‘“Mercadería vendible”. La frustración teatral cervantina y
el negocio del teatro’. In La España y el Cervantes del primer Quijote, edited by
José Alcalá Zamora and Gonzalo Queipo de Llano (Madrid: Real Academia,
2005), pp. 71–97.
Schevill, Rodolfo and Adolfo Bonilla y San Martín. ‘Introducción’. In La Galatea
by Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra, vol. I (Madrid: Imprenta de Bernardo
Rodríguez, 1914), pp. vi–xxxiii.
Stagg, Geoffrey. ‘Propaganda and Poetics on Parnassus: Cervantes’s Viaje del
Parnaso’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 8, no. I (1988):
pp. 23–38.
Suárez de Figueroa, Cristóbal. La constante Amarilis, edited by María Asunción
Satorre Grau (2002). http://eprints.ucm.es/3379.
Suárez de Figueroa, Cristóbal. El pasajero, edited by María Isabel López
Bascuñana (Barcelona: PPU, 1988).
Suárez de Figueroa, Cristóbal. Plaza universal de todas ciencias y artes (Perpiñán:
Louis Roure, 1629).
Urbina, Eduardo and Fernando González Moreno. ‘Los motivos de la fama y la
envidia en los retratos de Cervantes’. In Cervantes y sus enemigos. Anuario de
Estudios Cervantinos 9, edited by Eduardo Urbina and Jesús G. Maestro (Vigo:
Academia del Hispanismo, 2013), pp. 135–59.
Vega Carpio, Lope de. Laurel de Apolo, edited by Antonio Carreño (Madrid:
Cátedra, 2007).
Villegas, Esteban Manuel de. Eróticas o amatorias, edited by Narciso Alonso
Cortés (Madrid: Espasa-Calpe, 1913).
1 See Chapter 21 for a study on Viaje del Parnaso and ‘Adjunta al Parnaso’.
2 King, ‘The Academies…’, p. 371. Prose discourses or liciones were also
composed in order to instruct the public on a set topic of a serious nature, such
as ‘what is more beneficial to the republic, the study of humanities or the
exercise of arms’, although sometimes speeches concerned burlesque topics,
including discourses on a trickster’s life or in praise of injustice (King, ‘The
Academies…’, p. 371). All quotations have been translated by the author of this
essay unless otherwise stated.
3 Sánchez, pp. 18–22; Lokos, p. 109. Cervantes’s friend Cristóbal de Mesa
and the high-flier Lope de Vega reported on these problems through their
invectives in Rimas [Rhymes] (1611) and the translation of Virgil’s Églogas y
geórgicas [Eclogues and Georgics] (1618), and in Laurel de Apolo [Apollo’s Laurel
Wreath] (1630), respectively.
4 Cited in Sánchez, p. 38. Herrero García argues that in his Viaje del Parnaso
Cervantes similarly echoes Vélez de Guevara’s argumentative and quarrelsome
nature by nicknaming him ‘el bravo’ [the brave one] (Herrero García, p. 492).
For a synthesis of rivalries and fights in literary academies of the Golden Age,
see Cruz.
5 Cervantes, Three Exemplary Novels…, p. 192; King, Prosa novelística…, p.
29.
6 Márquez Villanueva, p. 128; King, Prosa novelística…, p. 100; Lokos, p.
129; Martín, pp. 154–6.
7 Sánchez, pp. 28–9, 38; Canavaggio, p. 206. Much of the information that
has survived on these justas literarias derives from Lope de Vega’s voluminous
correspondence with the patrons of the period. For further reference, see
Montoto, Sánchez, Brown, and Egido.
8 Canavaggio, p. 205.
9 Cervantes, Segunda parte…, p. 136.
10 Gaos, p. 30; Gracia García, p. 341.
11 King, ‘The Academies…’, p. 371; Canavaggio, p. 206.
12 Stagg, pp. 24–6; Lokos, p. 105; Close, ‘A Poet’s Vanity’, p. 54.
13 Lokos, p. 30; Close, ‘A Poet’s Vanity’, p. 60. Some of the authors who have
been identified as Cervantes’s friends and acquaintances, and whom he
commends in ‘Canto de Calíope’, are Francisco de Figueroa, Mateo Vázquez,
Luis Gálvez de Montalvo, Cristóbal de Virués, Andrés Rey de Artieda, and Pedro
Láinez (Schevill and Bonilla y San Martín, pp. xxx–xxxiii).
14 Lokos, pp. 33–4, 116, 129. For further reference on this fictionalization of
the world of the academies, see Sánchez and King, Prosa novelística…
15 Sánchez, p. 26; King, Prosa novelística…, p. 29.
16 Herrero García, pp. 580–1, 612.
17 Adrienne Laskier Martín discusses the Academy of Ochoa’s predilection for
burlesque poetry by looking at the sonetadas (insulting poems) that were
composed in order to indulge in jibes at Lope de Vega during his visit to Seville
in 1602 (Martín, p. 158).
18 King, Prosa novelística…, p. 27; Sánchez, pp. 194–5; Martín, pp. 157–8.
19 Herrero García, p. 612. Another writer whose literary fame Cervantes
predicts is the Count of Saldaña’s servant or ‘gentilhombre’, the Andalusian
Vélez de Guevara, whom, recognizing his wit, Cervantes names the
‘quitapesares’ [care dispeller] (Cervantes, Viaje…, p. 16). Cervantes also appears
to have acted as intellectual patron of young poets, as in the case of Fernando
de Lodeña, who was engaged to Cervantes’s younger sister, Doña Magdalena.
Cervantes appreciated his poetry to the extent of incorporating one of his
sonnets in the preliminaries of the Novelas ejemplares (Herrero García, pp. 675–
6).
20 Herrero García, pp. 466–7.
21 Cervantes, Viaje…, p. 79; Herrero García, p. 500.
22 Cervantes, Viaje…, pp. 19, 41; Herrero García, pp. 509, 513.
23 Cervantes, Viaje…, pp. 14, 25; Herrero García, pp. 461, 459.
24 Herrero García, pp. 580–1; Mancing, v. II, p. 576; Martín, p. 105.
25 Close, A Companion…, p. 12.
26 Canavaggio, pp. 205–6.
27 Sánchez, pp. 37, 47.
28 Cited in Sánchez, pp. 38, 45. Likewise Claramonte y Corroy’s list contains
the names of aristocrats, patrons, and poets like ‘el duque [duke] de Cea…el
duque de Pastrana, el conde [count] de Salinas, el Príncipe [prince] de
Esquilache, los marqueses [marquesses] de Alcañices, Povar, Peñafiel, Almazán,
Velada y Orani, los duques de Híjar y de Medinaceli, y los condes de Lemos, de
Olivares, de Villamor, de Rebolledo y de Cantillana’ (cited in Sánchez, p. 45).
29 Sánchez, p. 106.
30 Lokos, pp. 8, 114.
31 Cervantes, Viaje…, pp. 38, 40; Herrero García, pp. 325, 667, 817;
Mancing, v. I, p. 348.
32 Cervantes, Viaje…, p. 18; Sánchez, p. 106; Herrero García, p. 509.
33 Cervantes, Viaje…, pp. 18–19.
34 Herrero García, pp. 16, 37. Cervantes also dedicates to the Count of
Saldaña his ode ‘Florida y tierna rama’ [‘Flowered and Tender Branch’], in
which he claims to live under Saldaña’s wing; ‘a tu sombra’ (cited in Herrero
García, p. 507).
35 Cervantes’s relationship with Lope de Vega is studied in detail in Chapter
24 of this volume.
36 Cervantes, Viaje…, pp. 15, 20; Herrero García, pp. 18, 461, 559.
37 Cervantes, Viaje…, pp. 15–16; Sánchez, p. 19; Herrero García, pp. 16, 485.
38 Cervantes, Viaje…, pp. 14, 41; Herrero García, pp. 453, 687; Lokos, p. 35;
Close, A Companion…, p. 101.
39 Sanz Ayán, p. 78.
40 Sanz Ayán, pp. 73–5.
41 Cervantes, Viaje…, p. 67; Herrero García, pp. 839–40, 898.
42 Two other impresarios from Madrid who backed Cervantes’s career as a
playwright are Gaspar de Porres and Jerónimo Velázquez. Porres commissioned
Cervantes to write two plays; La confusa and El trato de Constantinopla y muerte
de Selim. Velázquez—father to Lope de Vega’s lover the ‘Bella Filis’ (Beautiful
Filis)—took charge of the Corral de la Pacheca (Comedy Theatre of the
Pacheca) when Cervantes attended classes at the Estudio or school run by Juan
López de Hoyos. Years later, Velázquez turned into a friend who might have
taken to stage part of the productions penned by Cervantes that have not
survived (Sanz Ayán, pp. 80, 84–7).
43 Cervantes, Viaje…, p. 16.
44 Cervantes, Viaje…, p. 74.
45 Lope de Vega, for example, writes in an infamous letter: ‘Buen siglo es este
[de poetas]…pero ninguno hay tan malo como Cervantes ni tan necio que alabe
a Don Quijote’ [‘This is a good century [of poets]…, but there is no one as bad
as Cervantes or as foolish so as to praise Don Quixote’] (cited in Gaos, p. 17).
46 Cervantes, Don Quixote, II.8, pp. 66, 68; cited in Urbina and González
Moreno, pp. 146–7.
47 Cervantes, Viaje…, p. 33; cited in Urbina and González Moreno, p. 151.
48 Cervantes, Viaje…, p. 14.
49 On Cervantes and Padilla’s friendship and mutual references in their works
see Bajona Oliveras.
50 Sánchez Portero, pp. 123–4.
51 Herrero García, p. 619.
52 Close, ‘A Poet’s Vanity’, p. 47. For further reference on Suárez de
Figueroa’s possible authorship of Avellaneda’s Quixote, see Espín Rodrigo.
53 Cited in Bataillon, p. 223. Cervantes could have based himself on López de
Úbeda’s ‘pícara’ in order to write the verses by Urganda the Unknown, which
appear in the preliminaries of the first Don Quixote (Bataillon, p. 222).
54 Cervantes, Viaje…, p. 63; cited in Bataillon, p. 220.
55 Bataillon, p. 220.
56 Cervantes, Viaje…, p. 63.
57 Herrero García, p. 817; Santos de la Morena, p. 310.
58 Bataillon, p. 226; Gaos, p. 17.
59 Villegas, p. 232; cited in Rivers, p. 121.
Chapter 26
Windmills of Reality, Giants of the
Imagination
Cervantes in British Literature
Zenón Luis-Martínez
Universidad de Huelva
There is not much to choose between [Don Quixote’s] tilting at the
sails of windmills and our tilting at the great wheel of the world.
—G.K. Chesterton
The first two Cervantine allusions in English address the adventure of
the windmills in the eighth chapter of Don Quixote, Part I. In George
Wilkins’s play The Miseries of Inforst Marriage (1607), misfortune-
stricken Scarborow declares in his drunken rants to be ‘armd to fight
with a Wind-mill’.1 In that same year, Thomas Middleton’s comedy
Your Five Gallants (1607) expresses Piamont’s rage at Pursenet’s
cozening of ‘forty pound in fair gold’ with very similar words: ‘‘Sfoot, I
could fight with a windmill now’.2 Wilkins and Middleton’s
representations of mental decay and comic fury through the knight
errant’s windmill delusion are dated two years after the first
publication of the first part of Don Quixote in Spain and five years
before the publication of its first translation into English (1612). They
attest not only to the fast assimilation of Cervantes into British culture
but also to the compelling force of the most emblematic episode in his
work.
Almost four hundred years after these plays, documentarists Keith
Fulton and Louis Pepe chronicled one of the several frustrated attempts
by Terry Gilliam to produce a feature film called The Man Who Killed
Don Quixote. Fulton and Pepe’s Lost in La Mancha (2002) registers,
among other moments inspired by Cervantes’s novel, Gilliam’s
preproduction animations of the knight’s tilting at the windmills, as
well as his joyous filming of two bulky rustics rehearsing as giants. But
it also shows the filmmaker’s final frustration at the project’s collapse,
epitomized in a drawing with the caption ‘The windmills of reality fight
back’.3 Gilliam’s attempt to overcome budget cuts, the noise of
unforeseen military aircraft, weather disasters, and absent film-stars
with the sole power of his artistic genius finds the best of metaphors in
Don Quixote’s famous adventure.
Beyond his character’s manic replacement of the real with the
imagined, Cervantes’s windmill/giant dichotomy embodies the struggle
between the poetic imagination and its own limitations. These early
and late moments in the history of Cervantine legacy condense the two
forces at work in what Harry Levin has called the ‘quixotic principle’ in
fiction, that is, ‘the tragicomic irony of the conflict between real life
and the romantic imagination’.4 One side represents Don Quixote as a
laughable buffoon with endless satiric potential, while the other seeks a
deeper understanding of the knight’s quarrel with a morally
impoverished world. These examples also bear witness to an
overwhelming predominance of Don Quixote over the rest of Cervantes’s
works. The practice of fiction in the light of Cervantes has been called
‘Cervantic’ or ‘Cervantean’: while the first term refers to those works
that imitate characters, plots, or style, the second relies on deep-level
recreation and subtle emulation as ways of assimilating or expanding
Cervantes’s idea and art of the novel.5 This complex interplay of
interpretations, imitations, and recreations marks four centuries of
fruitful engagement with Cervantes in British literature.
Valorous Adventures: John Fletcher to
Lewis Theobald
Early in Book III of Cervantes’s last novel, Los trabajos de Persiles y
Sigismunda, the protagonists, still under the feigned identities of
Periandro and Auristela, arrive in Lisbon. There Periandro commissions
a painter to make a canvas containing ‘the principall matters of his
history’ [‘los principales casos de su historia’].6 Days later they
continue their trip to Badajoz, where they meet a young playwright
who, fascinated by this narrative painting, intends to write a play
chronicling the complete ‘travels’ [‘trabajos’] in it. Too many technical
difficulties assault him, mostly derived from the still incomplete lives
and the uncertain destinies of the protagonists. But these do not deter
him from an enterprise that he wants to carry out ‘in despite of all rules
of Poetry, and the Art comicall’ [‘a pesar de todas las reglas de la
poesía y a despecho del arte cómico’].7 This episode shows Cervantes’s
awareness of the dramatic potential of his narrative work, but also of
the difficulties faced by any effort at dramatic adaptation of narrative
materials. Handicapped by the superiority of narrative in representing
reality, playwrights are depicted as having to cope with practical
problems of decorum—the handling of the unities of time, place, and
action—and scope—the difference between all-encompassing histories
or lives and more limited ‘cases’.
Despite these limitations, Cervantes’s works soon attracted
seventeenth-century English playwrights as excellent purveyors of
romantic intrigue, complexity of character, and a kind of moral
exemplarity that was not exempt from social and political ambiguities.
In the context of a widespread interest in Spanish literary works that
had originated in the sixteenth century, the playwrights’ attention was
not restricted to Don Quixote, as is the case in later centuries.
Cervantes’s most famous work first reached English drama in the form
of allusions and then through the theatrical force of some of its
narrative interpolations in Part I. But no English dramatist attempted a
full-scope adaptation until Thomas D’Urfey’s three-part The Comical
History of Don Quixote (1694–6). Besides Don Quixote, the immediate
success of the Novelas ejemplares, either in the original or through its
early French translations, was felt in several English plays. And the
potential for romance of Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda, first
translated into English in 1619, also moved the English theatrical
imagination. The thirteen Cervantes-inspired plays attributed to John
Fletcher (1579–1625) and/or his most intimate circle of collaborators
are the best testimony of this impact.8
Early allusions can be traced in plays like Wilkins’s The Miseries of
Inforst Marriage, Middleton’s Your Five Gallants, Ben Jonson’s Epicoene
(1610), Philip Massinger’s The Virgin Martyr (1622), or The Witch of
Edmonton (1623), by William Rowley, Thomas Dekker, and John Ford.9
But Francis Beaumont’s The Knight of the Burning Pestle (1612) is the
first full-fledged imitation of Don Quixote. Beaumont inserted the idea
of a deluded character that takes to knight errantry into a sophisticated
meta-theatrical game. Its protagonist, the apprentice Rafe, is
encouraged by his masters, a grocer and his wife, to take part in a play
that they are attending. Rafe decides to perform the part of a knight
errant bearing a pestle as his weapon. Inns taken for castles, prisoners
ludicrously released, and affairs with princesses are situations that
Beaumont borrowed from his source.10 He was followed by his
associate Fletcher, whose collaboration with Shakespeare must have
produced The History of Cardenio (1613), based on the Sierra Morena
episodes in I.24–36. But El curioso impertinente—the novella in I.33–5
that the curate reads at the inn and that postpones the resolution of the
loves of Cardenio, Lucinda, Dorotea, and Fernando—proved to be the
most attractive interpolation for theatrical purposes. The tale involving
Anselmo, the foolhardy husband who decides to test his wife Camila’s
virtue by exposing her to the courtship of his best friend Lotario,
provided Jacobean dramatists with ‘a neat structure with a small cast of
characters that would transfer well to the stage’.11 Its blend of
sentimental intrigue, dramatic irony, and moral probing directly
inspired Beaumont and Fletcher’s The Coxcomb (1609), Thomas
Middleton’s The Lady’s Tragedy (formerly known as The Second Maiden’s
Tragedy, 1611), and Nathan Field’s Amends for Ladies (1611).12 While
Fletcher’s knowledge of Don Quixote in Spanish is almost certain, he
and other dramatists accessed the tale through Nicholas Baudoin’s
French rendering Le Curieux Impertinent (1608).
Among the abovementioned plays, The Lady’s Tragedy, despite the
usual practice of changing some of the characters’ names, comes closest
to the Cervantine story. One of its two plots has Anselmus, brother to
the King of Florence, test his unnamed Wife through his friend
Votarius’ approaches, after their debate on whether it is worth exposing
her to this test. Like his model Lotario, Votarius argues by using the
Cervantine metaphor for the chastity test:
Must a man needs, in having a rich diamond,
Put in between a hammer and an anvil
And not believing the true worth and value,
Break it in pieces to find out the goodness,
And, in the finding, lose it?13
¿sería justo que te viniese en deseo tomar aquel diamante y ponerle entre
una yunque y un martillo, y allí, a pura fuerza de golpes y brazos, probar si
es tan duro y fino como dicen?
[Would it be reasonable in thee to desire to take that diamond and place it
between an anvil and a hammer, and by mere force of blows and strength of
arm try if it were as hard and as fine as they said?]14
Despite differences in detail, Middleton followed Cervantes in exploring
the manifold possibilities of his narrative: the overt treatment of
sexuality, particularly Anselmus’ voyeurism, the sentimental trials of
faith and betrayal, and their potentials for moral ambivalence.15
The theatrical success of El curioso impertinente drew attention to
Cervantes’s mastery in the art of the novella. The international impact
of the twelve Novelas ejemplares was also immediate after their original
publication in 1613. They were first translated into French in 1615, by
François de Rosset and Vital D’Augdinier, and although their first
translation into English was incomplete and late (1644), their influence
on English theatre was soon felt through knowledge of the original or
use of the French intermediate text. Fletcher, in collaboration with
Beaumont, first used this source in Love’s Pilgrimage (1615), where he
closely adapted Las dos doncellas. Fletcher was the sole author of the
comedy The Chances (1613–25), which adapted La señora Cornelia, and
which enjoyed much success through Restoration and eighteenth-
century adaptations. Also exclusively by Fletcher, Rule a Wife and Have
a Wife (1624) combined two plots, one taken from Alonso Jerónimo
Salas Barbadillo’s El sagaz Estacio (1620) and a subplot from El
casamiento engañoso.16 Thomas Middleton’s collaborative play with
Thomas Dekker and William Rowley, The Spanish Gipsy (1623), drew on
La fuerza de la sangre and La gitanilla. And John Webster, Philip
Massinger, and John Ford collaborated with Fletcher in The Fair Maid
of the Inn (1625), based on La ilustre fregona.17 On the whole,
Cervantes’s tales proved more attractive dramatically than his own
plays, which enjoyed little success in Spain. The exception to this rule
in England seems to be Philip Massinger, whose The Fatal Dowry (1619)
and The Renegado (1624) drew respectively on El viejo celoso and Los
baños de Argel, a circumstance that suggests Massinger’s perusal of a
copy of the editio princeps of the Ocho comedias y ocho entremeses
(1613).18
Published posthumously in 1617, Cervantes’s last novel first
appeared in English in the anonymous translation The Travels of Persiles
and Sigismunda: A Northern History (1619). Prepared after an
intermediate French translation of 1617, the book made its way into
Fletcher and Massinger’s tragicomedy The Custom of the Country (1620).
The dramatists adapted and expanded two plots from the last of
Cervantes’s work. Mauricio’s tale, starting in I.12, suggests the play’s
title: ‘Nowe you must knowe, that in our country there is a custome,
the worst of all that are wickedly observed’.19 The deflowering of the
bride by the husband’s brothers and near kindred (ius primae noctis) is
transformed in the play into the ‘admirable rare custome’ of the droit du
seigneur.20 Thus, the preparations for the wedding of Arnoldo and
Zenocia (Transila in the original) are interrupted when Count Clodio
claims this right. Zenocia’s resistance and her escape with Arnoldo and
his brother Rutillio are the basis for the dramatists’ main plot, which
revolves around the sexual entanglements caused by Zenocia’s
abduction by Leopold, a sea captain who takes her to Lisbon. In the
secondary plot, Rutillio assumes the plot functions of Cervantes’s Polish
traveller Ortel Banedre in Book III, who is made to believe that he has
killed Duarte in a street fight. Rutillio’s hiding under the protection of
Lady Guiomar, Duarte’s mother, and his occupation as a male prostitute
until he is betrothed to Guiomar, expand the Cervantine basis of this
part of the play.21 As Trudi L. Darby has observed, ‘dramatizing Persiles
and Sigismunda was a much more ambitious task than adapting the
Novelas, requiring a tight control of incident and a focus on a limited
number of issues’.22 Accordingly, Fletcher and Massinger’s effort
materializes Cervantes’s own musings about the relationship between
theatre and narrative, as expounded upon earlier in this section. And
their choice was to adapt episodes of Cervantes’s convoluted narrative
into a sex-obsessed two-plot tragicomedy.
In his Preface to the Fables Ancient and Modern (1700), John Dryden
wrote that this play had more ‘bawdry’ in it ‘than in all ours
together’.23 The horror expressed in Cervantes about the barbarous,
‘Northern’ custom alluded in the title gives way to its naturalization in
the play’s Mediterranean setting (Italy, Portugal) and to the more
trivialized treatment of sexual fantasy—Rutillio’s ‘rare tricks’ with
dozens of Lisbon women is the most extreme instance.24 The Custom of
the Country testifies not only to the attraction that Cervantes’s work had
for Jacobean dramatists, but also to the distance between Cervantes’s
integration of erotic adventure as part of Christian allegory and the
English dramatists’ ‘coarser’ treatment of sexuality.25
While Jacobean and Caroline drama exploited the full potential for
entertainment of all of Cervantes’s major works, the Restoration
inaugurates an almost exclusive focus on Don Quixote that will
dominate Cervantic literature in Britain. Plays like John Dryden’s The
Rival Ladies (1664) still found inspiration in Las dos doncellas, one of
the six Novelas ejemplares included in the first English translation by
James Mabbe in 1640. Equally, less Quixote-orientated interpolations
like El curioso impertinente continued to influence plays like The
Disappointment (1684) by Thomas Southerne, or John Crowne’s The
Married Beau: or, the Curious Impertinent (1694).26 But the adventures of
the knight of La Mancha gained ground, in part the effect of a
philosophico-critical interest in Don Quixote that runs from Robert
Burton’s comments on the knight’s madness due to inappropriate
readings in The Anatomy of Melancholy (1621) to John Locke’s praise of
the knight in his Essay Concerning Human Understanding (1690).27
In the meantime, Edmund Gayton’s Pleasant Notes upon Don Quixote
(1654) became the first critical commentary of Cervantes’s novel.
Gayton’s view of Cervantes’s protagonist pair as two ridiculous clowns
boosted the farcical interpretation that dominated English letters for
more than a century. John Phillips’s ‘translation’ of the work The
History of the most Renowned Don Quixote of Mancha (1687) claimed in
its title to be ‘made English according to the Humour of our Modern
Language’. Besides his anglicizing of the novel, Phillips’s endorsement
of Gayton’s farcical views were determinant for later dramatic versions
like Thomas D’Urfey’s three-part The Comical History of Don Quixote
(1694–6), a serious attempt to include a generous selection of episodes
from the two parts of the novel, although not necessarily in the same
order as in the Cervantine original. The first play includes outstanding
incidents of the first part, mainly the windmills, the drubbing of Don
Quixote at the inn, and the Cardenio plot, concluding with Don
Quixote’s return to his hometown imprisoned in a cage. The second
piece centres on events of the second part, remarkably those in relation
to Don Quixote’s stay with the Duke and the Duchess, Sancho’s
government of the Island of Barataria, and his defeat at the hands of
the Knight of the White Moon. The third mixes episodes from the two
parts, like the adventure with the lion, the wedding of Camacho (here
also including the wedding of Mary the Buxome, Sancho’s daughter, to
Camacho’s servant Jacques), Master Pedro’s puppet show, and Don
Quixote’s last will—although his death is left out from the play.
Conceived as a comic opera for Dorset Garden, the play remained
successful in part for the music composed by Henry Purcell, as well as
for remarkable performances like Joseph Haines’s impersonation of
Ginés de Pasamonte in Part I, or Cave Underhill’s Sancho in Part II.28
D’Urfey’s Comical History paved the way for a long list of Quixote
plays in eighteenth-century England. Among these, two adaptations
might have been particularly encouraged by D’Urfey revivals in the
1727–8 season. Henry Fielding’s Don Quixote in England was first
performed and published in 1734, although it had been drafted in
Leyden in 1728. Fielding’s play is a three-act comic opera that puts
quixotic satire at the service of political critique at a time when
opposition against Prime Minister Sir Robert Walpole was gaining
strength. Arrived at an English inn that he takes for a castle, and in
which he refuses to pay the innkeeper, Don Quixote becomes involved
in love intrigues, but particularly in the local oligarchs’ machinations
around parliamentary elections. Sancho, on his part, is depicted as a
degraded, gluttonous bumpkin in love with English meat and beer.
Fielding’s play put the fashionable view of Don Quixote and Sancho as
laughable buffoons to the service of political satire.29 Fielding’s idea,
clearly 
indebted 
to 
Gayton’s 
Notes 
and 
Phillips’s 
humorous
transposition of the story to English soil, might have also been
encouraged by the success of Lewis Theobald’s Double Falsehood, or The
Distressed Lovers (performed 1727, published 1728), a play whose
theatrical dullness is redeemed by its presumable status as the only
textual trace of Fletcher and Shakespeare’s Cardenio—of which more in
the last section of this survey.
The theatrical character of early Cervantine influence in Britain
should not obscure other nondramatic Cervantes-inspired fictions.
Among these, three Restoration works can be said to pioneer the
emergence of Cervantic and Cervantean narrative. John Bunyan’s The
Pilgrim’s Progress (1678) has been regarded by J. G. Ardila as ‘possibly
the first specimen of Cervantean emulation’ in its account of a Christian
zealot whose reading of the Bible embarks him on an insane search for
the New Jerusalem.30 Samuel Butler’s three-part narrative poem
Hudibras (1663, 1664, and 1678) transforms into anti-Puritan satire the
ludicrous adventures of the quixotic pair Sir Hudibras and his squire
Ralpho. The mock-heroic element, particularly in the second work,
advances the engagement with the Spanish poet and novelist in the
British Enlightenment. And William Winstanley’s parodic The Essex
Champion: or, The Famous History of Sir Billy of Billerecay and his Squire
Ricardo (1690) recounts the calamitous adventures of a rural Quixote
spellbound by the medieval English romances. Jonathan Swift’s The
Battle of the Books found inspiration in the strife between good and bad
poets in Viaje del Parnaso.31 Joseph Addison praised Cervantes in his
Spectator articles. And David Hume used different episodes in Don
Quixote (particularly II.13) to exemplify his theories of mental and
bodily ‘delicacy’ in his essay ‘The Standard of Taste’.32 This enlightened
concern with Cervantes and his major novel sets the standard for a
‘Golden Age’ of Don Quixote in British literature.33
Cervantic and Cervantean Novel: Henry
Fielding to Charles Dickens
Fielding’s literary move from drama to narrative after the Licensing Act
of 1737 marks a cornerstone in the approach to Cervantes’s work in
Britain. Don Quixote in England is not the last Cervantic play of the
eighteenth century, as testified by works like James Ayres’s Sancho at
Court; or, The Mock Governor (1742) and Frederick Pilon’s Barataria; or,
Sancho Turn’d Governor (1785).34 But Fielding’s comic opera is the last
work before the advent of a new concern with Cervantes in the novel.
Fielding’s first novel, The History of the Adventures of Joseph Andrews
(1742), originated a self-conscious tradition of Cervantic imitation at a
crucial moment of rise and consolidation of the novel in Britain.35 On
the title-page of the first edition, Fielding declared that his novel was
‘Written in Imitation of the Manner of Cervantes, Author of Don
Quixote’.36 Though not conceived as straightforward imitation, Joseph
Andrews was modelled on Don Quixote in its construction of character
and incident. The character pair of Parson Adams and Joseph Andrews
replicates Don Quixote and Sancho Panza. Like their ancestors, their
adventures and misfortunes are facilitated by travel. The gentlemen,
maids, rogues, and innkeepers of Fielding’s eighteenth-century England
are indebted to Cervantes’s seventeenth-century Spain. The conflict
between ideal and material worlds affects Adams and Joseph’s ordeals
in similar ways to Don Quixote and Sancho. In this sense, Adams is
truly quixotic in his inability to come to terms with the reality around
him, and in his attempt to impose his outmoded ideals of virtue and
learning. Like Don Quixote, he is an object of mockery, but also a
complex and sympathetic figure.37
But Fielding’s abovementioned ‘Manner’ transcends plain imitation,
thus inaugurating a Cervantean narrative style. He sprinkled his novel
with thoughts about narrative fiction that evince a conscious emulation
of his master’s novelistic practice. In the Preface, he labels his own
manner ‘comic Romance’, which he defines as ‘a comic Epic-Poem in
Prose’ of ‘extended and comprehensive’ action, of ‘a larger Circle of
Incidents’, and of ‘a greater Variety of Characters’ than traditional
romance.38 Beyond tone and scope, Fielding also found in Cervantes a
rationale for handling the relations between literature and life. The
opening chapter of Book III constitutes a defence of ‘Biography’ as the
only method of accessing narrative ‘Truth’ in the representation not of
‘Men’, but ‘Manners’, not ‘an Individual’, but ‘a Species’. In this sense,
Don Quixote comprehends ‘the History of the World in general, at least
that Part which is polished by Laws, Arts, and Sciences’.39 Fielding asks
readers to disregard the particulars of historical truth when
approaching the universal exemplarity of Cervantine narrative:
For tho’ it may be worth the Examination of Criticism whether the
Shepherd Chrysostom, who, as Cervantes informs us, died for love of the
fair Marcella, who hated him, was ever in Spain will any one doubt but
that such a silly Fellow hath really existed? Is there in the World such a
Sceptic as to disbelieve the Madness of Cardenio, the Perfidy of
Ferdinand, the impertinent Curiosity of Anselmo, the Weakness of
Camilla, the irresolute Friendship of Lothario; tho’ perhaps as to the
Time and Place where those several persons lived, that good Historian
may be deplorably deficient.40
The championing of Cervantes in Joseph Andrews served its author to
endorse an idea of the novel that restored the pleasures of a ‘tension-
driven plot’, thus promoting incident, process, and moral questioning at
a time when Samuel Richardson’s Pamela (1740) had imposed the more
‘static model’ of the epistolary method. This Cervantine turn played a
crucial role in inclining the balance on Fielding’s side after the earlier
success of his rival.41
Joseph Andrews also set the example for two of Fielding’s most
eminent contemporaries: Laurence Sterne (1713–68) and Tobias
Smollett (1721–71). Sterne’s The Life and Opinions of Tristam Shandy,
Gentleman (1759–67) occupies a unique place among Cervantic and
Cervantean fictions of all times. In the novel and in his personal
correspondence, Sterne declared his admiration for Cervantes and Don
Quixote. Tristam swears ‘by the ashes of my dear Rabelais, and dearer
Cervantes’.42 And at the beginning of the novel he devotes a long
digression to the comparison of Parson Yorick’s horse with Rocinante,
and the Parson’s own ‘spiritual and refined sentiments’ to those of ‘the
peerless knight of La Mancha’.43
Besides Yorick, Tristam, his father Walter, and particularly his uncle
Toby share obvious quixotic features.44 Sterne’s characters lose track of
the courses of life through a monomaniac obsession with their ‘hobby-
horses’, which function as ‘miniature’ forms of quixotic madness. Toby’s
obsession with fortifications and his idealized love of Widow Wadman,
Walter’s scientific musings, and Tristam’s devotion to writing, become
quixotic enterprises in themselves.45 In Wayne C. Booth’s words, we see
Cervantes’s narrator ‘at his desk as intimately as we ever see Tristam’,
and this use of the self-conscious narrator becomes Sterne’s best
strategy for transforming the Cervantine relations between literature
and life.46
Smollett is arguably ‘the English-speaking author of greatest
indebtedness to Cervantes’.47 He authored one of the finest English
translations of Don Quixote (1755), completed while he was working on
his first novel, Roderick Random (1748). Smollett’s veneration for
Cervantes is patent in the biography that prefaces this translation, in
which he praised the author’s ‘delightful stream of humour and
invention’.48 In the Preface to Roderick Random, he extolled Don Quixote
for ‘converting romance to purposes far more useful and entertaining’
than those practised before its author.49 Smollet’s Fieldingesque
adoption of Cervantic comic romance continued in his second novel,
Peregrine Pickle (1751). But his Cervantean vision was accomplished in
his last and best novel, The Expedition of Humphry Clinker (1771).50
Written in epistolary form, this novel has been considered an inclusive
epitome of those eighteenth-century narrative traditions fostered by
Cervantes’s example: travel book, sentimental fiction, and comic
romance.51 Besides, Smollett’s characters are explicitly quixotic—like
Lieutenant Lisamahago, ‘a tall, meagre figure, answering, with his
horse, the description of Don Quixote mounted on Rozinante’52—or,
more elaborately so, Clinker’s religious enthusiasm and Matthew
Bramble’s sentimentalism and misanthropy.53
Fielding, Sterne, and Smollett are responsible for transforming the
received image of Don Quixote as a ridiculous madman into a complex,
humorous, and lovable character.54 They also paved the way for later
emulations of Cervantes’s art, from Fielding’s own The History of Tom
Jones, A Foundling (1749) to nineteenth-century continuations seen in
the works of Jane Austen, Sir Walter Scott, Charles Dickens, William M.
Thackeray, George Eliot, and Henry James. They also inspired more
straightforward imitations of the original. Charlotte Lennox’s The
Female Quixote, or, The Adventures of Arabella (1752) and Tobias
Smollett’s The Adventures of Sir Launcelot Greaves (1760) are the most
remarkable instances of a narrative pattern that takes quixotic delusion
as leitmotiv of their action. Lennox’s The Female Quixote (1752) was
praised by Fielding as a ‘most excellent performance’ and ‘a Work of
true Humour’. In spite of the model’s alleged superiority, Fielding
matched Lennox with Cervantes for gaining the reader’s sympathy
toward her mad heroine. Lennox was even acknowledged to surpass her
model in verisimilitude of character and situation, and especially in the
observance of ‘Epic Regularity’. This involved the use of a consistent
episodic structure, admitting interpolations only if entirely connected
to the main plot, much against the ‘loose unconnected Adventures in
Don Quixote’.55 Lennox’s plot observes this neoclassical idea of the
episodic structure in her recounting of the adventures of Arabella,
brought up in a castle by his widowed father, where she lives up to the
delusions of the sentimental French romances that she reads
compulsively. Rescued from the Thames after throwing herself into the
river in the attempt to escape from would-be ravishers, indeed just
horsemen, Arabella’s ending is, unlike Quixote’s, a happy one; she is
cured from her mania and accepts marriage to her cousin and suitor,
Glanville.
The critical approval of Lennox’s novel matched its success among
readers. It also set a school for later romance-reading mad heroines in
comedies like the anonymous Angelica: or, Quixote in Petticoats (1758)
and George Colman’s Polly Honeycomb (1760), or in prose fictions like
Maria Edgeworth’s ‘Angelina’ (1801), Eaton Stannard Barrett’s The
Heroine (1813), and most remarkably Jane Austen’s Northanger Abbey
(1817–18, though finished by 1798). Partially modelled on Arabella.
Austen’s protagonist Catherine Morland is an ardent reader of gothic
romances since her childhood, particularly Anne Radcliffe’s novels, so
she is prone to mistaking reality with her favourite fictions when she is
invited to spend some time in Northanger Abbey. However, her
unromantic and somewhat un-feminine character marks a certain
distance from previous quixotic heroines, signalling a path to more
realistic characterization.56
Another trend in quixotic fiction involving a male protagonist begins
with Smollett’s The Adventures of Sir Launcelot Greaves, published
serially in the British Magazine between January 1760 and December
1761. The lovelorn knight Sir Launcelot, influenced by the apparent
loss of his beloved Miss Aurelia Darnel, feigns madness and begins a
series of adventures in the company of his squire, Timothy Crabshaw.
Launcelot’s project is overtly quixotic: ‘I do purpose…to act as a
coadjutor to the law, and even to remedy evils which the law cannot
reach; to detect fraud and treason, abase insolence, mortify pride,
discourage slander, disgrace immodesty, and stigmatize ingratitude.’57
But the protagonist also denies being merely ‘a modern Don Quixote’: ‘I
have not yet encountered a windmill for a giant; nor mistaken this
public house for a magnificent castle…I see and distinguish objects as
they are discerned and described by other men.’58 The disclaimer can
hardly conceal his ancestry. His very surname, ‘greaves’, refers to the
piece of armour that covers the shins, and is semantically close to
Spanish ‘quijote’—i.e. the piece of armour covering the thigh.59
Smollett’s imitation is a satiric romance built upon Cervantine
characters and situations, exposing the vice of the English society of its
time.60
Like Lennox, Smollett inspired a long list of quixotic satires in the
last quarter of the eighteenth century. The Spiritual Quixote, or The
Summer’s Ramble of Mr Geoffrey Wildgoose (1773) was the first novel by
the English priest Richard Graves. Wildgoose’s madness ensues from
reading too many pastoral treatises, after which he starts a tour across
rural England in the company of his squire, the cobbler Jerry Tugwell,
with the intention of restoring the Methodist faith. The advent of a
lady, Julian Townshend, and a blow on the head, put an end to
Wildgoose’s mania and cause his return to the Anglican Church. In the
anonymous epistolary novel The Philosophical Quixote, or Memoirs of Mr
David Wilkins (1782), several correspondents amusedly describe the
experiments of the protagonist, driven mad by the excessive reading of
books of natural philosophy. Jane and Elizabeth Purbeck’s two political
fictions, William Thornborough, or the Benevolent Quixote (1791) and The
History of Sir George Warrington, or The Political Quixote (1797) illustrate
‘the change experienced in the tradition of quixotism’ after the French
revolution.61 While the first identifies the quixotic drive with
philanthropic tendencies, the second is a conservative satire in which
its protagonist Sir George is deluded by the reading of radical treatises
endorsing utopian ideals of liberty and fraternity. Similarly, Charles
Lucas’s The Infernal Quixote: A Tale of the Day (1801) displays a gallery
of ‘ideological quixotes’ in the form of political radicals.62
The transition from the comic/satiric to a romanticized vision of
Cervantes is embodied, among others, in the figures of Walter Scott
(1771–1832) and Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley (1797–1851). A reader
of Cervantes in Spanish, Scott imitated the master particularly in his
first novel, the anonymously published Waverley (1814). Its hero,
Edward Waverley, an enthusiastic reader of Spanish and French
chronicles and romances, but also of Drayton, Spenser, Shakespeare,
and Milton, leaves home in search of adventure with his literary
education as his only background. Scott’s reluctance to accept his novel
as ‘an imitation of the romance of Cervantes’ in his address to the
reader purports both identification and distance:
My intention is not to follow the steps of that inimitable author, in
describing the total perversion of the intellect as misconstrues the
objects actually presented to the senses, but that more common
aberration from sound judgement, which apprehends occurrences
indeed in their reality, but communicates to them a tincture of its own
romantic tone and colouring.63
The distinction is one of nuance, but it is an important one. Waverly is
a silent, discrete, and individualistic Quixote, one without ‘a confident,
with whom to communicate his reveries’ and sensible to ‘the ridicule
attached to them’, willing to infuse history with a romantic vision but
reluctant to fall into the trap of ludicrous errors.64 Beyond Waverley’s
subtle quixotism of his character, critics have detected a deeper
Cervantean debt in Scott’s themes, as well as in narrative structure and
technique. These would include ‘the journey and inn motifs, the found
manuscript device, and the strategy of self-conscious textual
referentiality’.65
Mary Shelley’s biography of Cervantes is the most substantial text in
her Lives of the Most Eminent Literary and Scientific Men of Italy, Spain,
and Portugal (1837). Her account is prototypical of the romantic myth
of Cervantes as man and author. In connection with his captivity in
Algiers and later release, she extols ‘the natural elevation of Cervantes
over his fellow-creatures, when, all being placed on an equality, the
qualities of the soul alone produced a difference of rank’. Cervantes
deserves ‘as high a place for moral excellence as his genius has secured
for him in the world of intellect’.66
While Shelley’s conception of Cervantes’s moral excellence is
matched with a literary genius that exceeds Shakespeare’s, her portrait
of Cervantes’s most famous pair of characters endorses the enduring
romantic myth of an elevated, tragic hero who finds its counterpart in
the natural wisdom of Sancho’s foolishness: ‘While the sublime
character of Don Quixote warms the heart of the enthusiast, the truth
of the sad picture which his fortunes present tickled the fancy of the
man of the world. Children revel in the comedy, old men admire the
shrewdness, of Sancho Panza’.67 For Shelley, the author himself is a
quixotic character, mistreated during his life in spite, or perhaps
because, of his deep, idealistic, and morally superior insights into
reality. Besides her critical biography, Cervantes’s direct influence upon
Shelley’s fiction is particularly felt in the episode in Frankenstein (1818)
involving the Muslim woman Safie, which is clearly modelled on the
captain’s tale of Zoraida in Don Quixote, I. 39–41, which was inserted at
a later stage of the writing of the novel after one of Shelley’s re-
readings of Cervantes’s novel.68
After the Romantics, the most noticeable Cervantic fictions of the
Victorian era are found in the work of Charles Dickens (1812–70) and
George Eliot (Mary Anne Evans, 1819–80). Eliot’s male and female
quixotes, Reverend Casaubon and Dorothea Brooke in Middlemarch
(1871–2), and Maggie Tulliver in The Mill on the Floss (1860), capture
the romantic spirit of idealistic and philanthropic characters guided by
their readings and excursions to the side of fancy.69 Dickens’s
Cervantism is most conspicuous in his first two novels: The Posthumous
Papers of the Pickwick Club (1837) and Oliver Twist (1837–8). In the
latter, the picaresque content is indebted to Rinconete and Cortadillo. In
the former, the character pair made by the idealist Samuel Pickwick
and the realist Sam Weller is explicitly modelled on Don Quixote and
Sancho, although Pickwick’s quixotism is the result of his philanthropic
benevolence rather than madness.70 Besides Cervantic imitation,
Dickens also rehearses self-conscious, multi-layered Cervantean fiction,
as evinced in his narrator’s own editorial role of someone else’s work in
the manner of the Cervantine narrator’s confrontation of the history
written by Cide Hamete Benengeli:
Many authors entertain, not only a foolish, but a really dishonest
objection to acknowledge the sources from whence they derive much
valuable information. We have no such feeling…and whatever ambition
we might have felt under other circumstances to lay claim to the
authorship of these adventures, a regard for truth forbids us to do more
than claim merit of their judicious arrangement and impartial
narration…The labours of others have raised for us an immense
reservoir of important facts.71
As Pedro J. Pardo has argued, by 1837, English literature had
already exhausted the full spectrum of imaginable interpretations of
Don Quixote, from the hard reading of the character as a farcical
buffoon to the soft view that endows the character with deeper
symbolic dimensions.72 Later treatments of Cervantes’s major novel,
particularly after 1900, have revived the dialogue between the
historically bound dimension of Cervantine narrative and the alleged
universal qualities that confer upon it the enduring status of myth.
The Returns of Don Quixote: G. K.
Chesterton to Robin Chapman
British contemporary prose fiction has continued and renewed its
interest in Cervantes. On the one hand, the Cervantine trace is
noticeable in a long list of major novelists including, among others,
Virginia Woolf, James Joyce, Joseph Conrad, George Orwell, Muriel
Spark, and Anthony Burgess.73 Postmodern experimental narrative has
found in Cervantes a stimulus for exploring the boundaries between
imagination and reality, materialized in the practice of self-conscious
fiction; novels such as L. P. Hartley’s The Love Adept (1969), John
Fowles’s The French Lieutenant’s Woman (1969), and Salman Rushdie’s
The Moor’s Last Sigh (1995) base some of their metafictional exploits on
their explicit indebtedness to Don Quixote.74 On the other hand, a
handful of overtly quixotic novels have rehearsed different adjustments
of the characters and the myth of Don Quixote in order to expand the
significance of Cervantes’s major novel to contemporary life and
literature. In these works, the confrontation between Cervantes’s own
time and the contemporary world promotes history to the frontline of
new Cervantic and Cervantean fictions. Among these, the work of three
writers—G. K. Chesterton (1874–1936), Graham Greene (1904–91),
and Robin Chapman—exemplify three distinct kinds of literary ‘return’
of Don Quixote and Don Quixote to present-day times and letters.
The first model explores the personal, social, and political
consequences of a hypothetical restoration of medieval values to the
contemporary world, a sort of utopian/dystopian reinstatement of the
values defended by Don Quixote in his insanity. This is the central
theme of G. K. Chesterton’s The Return of Don Quixote (1927).
Chesterton’s unconventional ideas about social and political life, as well
as his orthodox Catholicism, render his career a quixotic enterprise
against modernity.75 His debt to Cervantes was constant in his writings.
The early essay ‘The Divine Parody of Don Quixote’ (1901) inaugurates
what critics have labelled a ‘quixotic period’. The essay summarizes
Chesterton’s ideas about the significance of Cervantes’s novel,
particularly Part I; medieval adventure and ceremonial are ingrained in
Western life and culture. Don Quixote’s madness seems to us less
strange than many of the sublime ideas and philosophical constructions
of the past: ‘[t]o trust entirely to [his] hare-brained justice as a basis for
our civilization would be absurd, but it will be found even more absurd
in the long run to ignore it or to root it out’.76
The paradox that sets quixotism between insanity and justice was
put to the test in three of Chesterton’s novels: The Napoleon of Notting
Hill (1905), The Ball and the Cross (1910), and most remarkably, The
Return of Don Quixote (published in 1927, although written before
World War I).77 The latter’s plot does not seek, at least until its ending,
a straightforward parallel with its model. A group of young English
aristocrats get together at the mansion of Seawood Abbey in order to
stage a play about the Middle Ages, ‘Blondel the Troubadour’, written
by Olive Ashley, one of the two females in the group. The performance
becomes the start of an overturn of the whole social system when the
eccentric librarian Michael Herne, who has played Richard the
Lionheart, refuses to take off his theatrical costumes and starts a
dictatorship with medieval foundations, supported by the local
oligarchs. His regime has to face the strike of the coal-tar-derived dye
manufacturers, a trade union led by the syndicalist John Braintree.
When Braintree is summoned to a court of arbitration to respond to his
offences, he is surprised to see King Herne pass judgment against those
oligarchs who have unlawfully seized the rights of medieval craft
guilds. Herne leaves his office, takes a lance, and sets for the
countryside in a hansom cab as a knight errant in the company of
Douglas Murrell, his own Sancho Panza. Their ensuing adventurous
period as a modern Quixote and Sancho is only reported cursorily in
the novel.
The Return of Don Quixote is a choral novel, exploring several
comparisons between its characters and Cervantes’s knight besides the
most obvious choice of Herne. John Braintree’s socialist syndicalism
retains a utopian component that is quixotic in spirit. Olive Ashley’s
literary and artistic medievalism is patent in her family’s connections
with the Pre-Raphaelites, her playwriting, and her scenic designs. Olive
embarks another character, Douglas Murrell, on a bizarre quest for a
unique illumination red dye that culminates in Murrell’s release of a
mad artisan from an asylum and in his return in the antique hansom
cab that later coveys Herne and himself on their adventures. These
forms of quixotism serve to concoct a parable about social reformation,
the dangers of absolutism, and the virtues and shortcomings of
alternative social theories. The novel also explores the redeeming
powers of the Catholic faith;78 at the end of the novel, Rosamund
Severne restores her mansion to its original monastic use, converts to
Catholicism, and begins social work as a nurse. Chesterton insists that
the visionary aspects of medievalism are a powerful tool against the
alienation caused by post-industrial political systems. As put by
Douglas Murrell, contemporary men have to combat the very enemies
haunting Cervantes’s hero: ‘You have tied men to tools so gigantic that
they do not know on whom the strokes descend. You have justified the
nightmare of Don Quixote. The mills really are giants’.79
While 
Chesterton 
delved 
into 
the 
quixotic 
spirit 
in 
a
characteristically English setting, other forms of contemporary
Cervantism have devolved the story to Spain. Graham Greene’s
Monsignor Quixote (1982) posits a second kind of return by presenting
two ‘descendants’ of Cervantes’s original pair in the Spain of the
transition from Franco’s dictatorship to democracy. Like Chesterton’s,
Greene’s aim is social and political life. Also, like Chesterton, Greene
was a Catholic with a particular interest in issues of faith. But Greene
exploits more systematically and overtly than Chesterton the parallels
between his novel and Cervantes’s. Its protagonist, Father Quixote, the
parish priest of El Toboso hated by his bishop, is removed from his
position when he finds himself ascended to monsignor by ludicrous
chance. His friend Enrique Zancas, the communist mayor of the town,
loses the elections. Both find themselves out of office and set out for a
tour around Spain in the priest’s old Seat 600, nicknamed Rocinante.
Besides the two protagonists, other parallels include secondary figures,
situations, and structure. As in the original, Monsignor and Zancas
embark on two trips, both ending in forced returns and the second in
the protagonist’s death. The seventeenth-century Holy Brotherhood is
replaced with the modern Guardia Civil, penitents with church
processions, salacious inn wenches with love-making actresses in adult-
rated films, galley slaves with road delinquents, and beating and
cudgelling with flamboyant car accidents.80
Greene’s meticulous rewriting of his model manages to balance its
action and thought, its wit and depth, its comedy and tragedy. Despite
being provincial and sleazy, the Spain of the political transition is
conjured up to revive the vibrancy, excitement, and complexity of
Cervantes’s Golden Age. Like their ancestors, Monsignor and Zancas
have to deal with a changing world, and more particularly, with their
profound ideological differences. Arguably Greene’s major achievement
is his updating of the dialogic qualities of the original novel.
Confrontation and interaction reinforce the two protagonists’ friendship
and facilitate their progressive transformations. The influence of
Unamuno and of Madariaga’s notions of the ‘quixotization of Sancho’
and ‘sanchicization of Don Quixote’ are visible in Greene’s writing.81
Each character’s exposure to the other’s ideas and life experience ends
up in an erosion of their faiths into more sceptic and eclectic
worldviews. Greene’s novel is ultimately a moral fable and a work of
ideas, which, inspired by its model, rejects absolute worldviews and
invites perspectivism.
The third model of Cervantic return presents different sequels to Don
Quixote in the form of historical fiction. This formula has been
masterfully exploited in three novels by Robin Chapman: the earlier
and successful The Duchess’s Diary (1980), and the more recent Sancho’s
Golden Age (2004) and Pasamonte’s Life (2005). The three works share a
similar modus operandi with plots shooting off from loose ends in the
original’s storyline. The Duchess’s Diary, inspired by the chapters
dealing with Don Quixote’s stay at the house of the Duke and Duchess
in II.30–56, is Chapman’s most sophisticated tour de force. Chapman
forges the figures of Doña María Isabel Echauri y Pradillo and her
husband Don Jerónimo, Duke of Caparroso, as the ‘historical’
counterparts of Cervantes’s characters. A Preface asserts that we are
reading the first English edition and translation of a Spanish
manuscript of 1616, written by the Duchess herself in a blank bundle
given to her as a gift by Cervantes in 1608. The diary registers the
period between 26 January and 23 April 1616, although all entries
belonging to late February and the whole month of March are said to
have been intentionally ripped out. An epilogue briefly informs of the
Duchess’s later life in the Indies, and her remarriage in Puerto Rico
until her death in 1645. Chapman’s relation to such a manuscript
parallels Cervantes’s narrator in respect of the ‘history’ written by Cide
Hamete Benengeli.
The Duchess writes from her confinement, first in her husband’s
hunting box and then in a monastery, and later, on her way to meeting
Cervantes, an aim that she achieves only on 23 April 1616 to see her
‘author’ dead in his house. María Isabel mixes her recollections of 1608,
when she became close to Cervantes and fell in love with him during
his summer stay in her house, with details of her unhappy life with
Jerónimo. While acknowledging the excellence of Don Quixote, Part II,
she feels betrayed by the treatment of her person under the disguise of
the frivolous and cruel Duchess. Cervantes’s use of an intimate physical
detail revealed to him by María Isabel triggers off the narrative. In
Chapter 48, Doña Rodríguez discloses to Don Quixote a secret involving
‘two issues that [the Duchess] has, one in each leg, by which all the evil
humours, of which the doctors say she is full, are discharged’ [‘dos
fuentes que tiene en las dos piernas, por donde se desagua todo el mal
humor de quien dicen los medicos que está llena’].82 Besides those two
orifices, Cervantes has arrogated the invention of most of what he saw
that summer in the masques and entertainments designed for him—
Countess Trifaldi and Clavileño, among others. This major statement in
the Duchess’s narrative sustains her feminine—and feminist—claim
against the constraints imposed by marriage and subjection; her diary
cries against the confinements dictated by a patriarchal notion of
literary authorship.83
Sancho’s Golden Age (2004) mixes an omniscient narrator with the
account by two privileged storytellers: Rocinante and Rucio. The
complex narrative takes place after 15 September 1614, the alleged
date of Don Quixote’s death. Horse and donkey have shifted roles in
relation to their masters: a realist Rocinante, who has been donated to
Sancho, shares a stable with his former companion, more prone to
imaginative fancy. Their recollections as cavalry of the knight errant
and his squire mix with more recent events. Rucio has been part of
Sancho and the Barber’s excursions as shepherds in their attempt to
materialize Don Quixote’s pastoral fantasies after his final retirement in
Chapters 67 and 73 of Part II. Their adventures under the names of
Panzino and Miculoso take the latter to a stream where he spies on a
girl and a boy making love. Miculoso’s account of the scene to Sancho
steers ‘between a rather overheated description of her natural charms
and his conviction that this mysterious nymph who’d appeared out of
nowhere had to be none other than his sublime Phyllis’.84 These Golden
Age amatory reveries clash with the hard facts; the nymph is Sancho’s
daughter Sanchica, in love with Mendo but betrothed to the daughter
of Lope Tocho, son to the town’s mayor. Lope, on his part, is in love
with Laurencia, daughter of Aldonza Lorenzo (Don Quixote’s Dulcinea)
and betrothed to Mendo. Sanchica’s pregnancy puts the curate to
undoing previous marriage contracts in order to bring the lovers
together. Highly reminiscent of the pastoral interpolations in Don
Quixote, particularly the wedding of Camacho in II.19–21, the novel
also contains metafictional ruminations in which the main narrator and
the two beasts discuss, in Neoaristotelian fashion, the pleasures and
limits of poetry and the thin boundaries between history and fiction.
The third of the novels, Pasamonte’s Life, stems from the affirmation
made in Part I of Don Quixote that the galley slave that the knight
releases, Ginés de Pasamonte, ‘has himself written his story as grand as
you please, and has left the book in the prison in pawn for two hundred
reals’, in order later to complete his work while he is in the galleys and
take the first part out of pawn (I.22). Chapman claims to make up for
the story’s failure to reach the press ‘in the hope of giving this engaging
rogue further liberty and life’.85 Pasamonte’s first-person narrative
begins with the recovery of his manuscript after sacking the printing
press in Barcelona to which it had been sold. In the first part,
Pasamonte reads the old manuscript aloud up to its abrupt interruption.
There we learn about his birth within a family of actors in Seville, his
adventures as a soldier in the Armada expedition of 1588, his sojourn
at court while a favourite and lover of the Countess of Peñamarga, but
also about his time as a criminal in Madrid, his first conviction to the
galleys, his idyllic years spent in Cyprus after his escape, and his second
arrest. The second part resumes the writing, filling the gaps between
his release by Don Quixote in I.22, his theft and loss of Rucio, and his
appearance as the puppeteer Master Pedro at the inn near Zaragoza in
II.30. An Epilogue in the hand of Pasamonte’s lover briefly informs the
reader of his death sentence and his last-minute escape for a new life in
Sicily. Chapman adroitly combines tragicomedy and historical fiction in
this revival of the picaresque genre. As a whole, the trilogy
recommends his author as a self-conscious practitioner of the
Cervantine art of storytelling. Eminent Cervantist Edward C. Riley has
said of one of Chapman’s novels that it shows ‘a truer understanding of
Cervantes than twenty books of criticism’.86 Chapman’s manipulations
of Cervantes’s deliberate lacunae certainly expose their boundless
appeal to the literary imagination.
Lost in Cervantes: William Shakespeare to
Terry Gilliam
The many remarkable findings in the history of Cervantes’s reception in
Britain are paradoxically framed by two major losses. The first sends us
back a few months after the publication in London of Thomas Shelton’s
The History of the Valorous & Witty Knight-Errant Don Quixote of the
Mancha (1612). The accounts register of the King’s Treasurer of the
Chamber contains an entry of 20 May 1613 that mentions a payment
made to the actor Henry Condell for performances of plays by Fletcher,
Shakespeare, and others, including one Cardenno, in the presence of
Princess Elizabeth and Frederick, the Elector Palatine. Another payment
to the actor John Hemminges is entered seven weeks later, on 9 July
1613, for a play named Cardenna. The slightly differing titles are nearly
coincident with the subject of bookseller Humphrey Moseley’s 9
September 1653 entry in the Stationers’ Register of a book called ‘The
History of Cardenio, by M. Fletcher. & Shakespeare’, which did not
reach the press. Little doubt exists nowadays as to the links between
these three entries and a single play probably written in collaboration
by John Fletcher and William Shakespeare, partially dramatizing the
Sierra Morena adventures found in Don Quixote I.24–36.87 Although the
play is not extant in print or manuscript, its alleged rewritings and re-
imaginings have been numerous, including the work of renowned
Shakespeare scholars like Lewis Theobald’s Double Falsehood, or, The
Distressed Lovers (1728), Stephen Greenblatt’s internet Cardenio Project,
and Gary Taylor’s ‘The History of Cardenio: 1612–2012’ (2012), and of
acclaimed novelists like Robin Chapman’s Shakespeare’s Don Quixote
(2011).
The enduring attraction of The History of Cardenio for novelists,
playwrights, and scholars is justified by the lure of a pioneering
adaptation of Cervantes bearing partly the stamp of the other
undisputed genius of European literature. The critical desire of bringing
Cervantes and Shakespeare together took Spanish scholar Luis Astrana
Marín to conjecture a possible rendezvous between both authors on the
occasion of the Earl of Nottingham’s embassy to Valladolid in July
1605 in order to seal the peace accorded a year earlier in London.88
The idea was recreated by Anthony Burgess in ‘A Meeting in Valladolid’
(1982)—a short story that envisaged less amicable conditions for the
encounter of ‘the best Spaniard with the best Englishman’ [‘El mejor
español junto al mejor inglés’] fantasized by Astrana.89 The recent
publication of a critical edition of Lewis Theobald’s The Double
Falsehood, or The Distressed Lovers (1728) as part of the Third Arden
Shakespeare Series delves deep into this critical desire, perhaps in spite
of editor Brean Hammond’s ‘cautious’ approach to the relations
between Theobald’s play and the original Cardenio.90 Theobald is
somehow responsible for having fostered an idea of his play as the
work of ‘some other Shakespeare’, ‘blest with the Force and Master-
Genius of the first’.91 The Royal Licence authorizing its entry on the
Stationer’s Register insists on its status as a revision and adaptation of a
‘manuscript copy of an original play of William Shakespeare’.92 And a
verse prologue to its first edition by Philip Frowde characterized
‘Shakespeare’s genius’ in this play as ‘some region’ where ‘a thousand
landscapes meet/Our ravish’d view, irregularly sweet’, thus typically in
need of regularization by Theobald’s Augustan mind and pen.93
Theobald himself claimed in the Preface to be in possession of three
manuscripts of a play that some preferred to attribute to Fletcher, in
spite of his own ‘partiality for Shakespeare’.94
Theobald’s reduction of the original play to one single plot dealing
lineally with Henriquez’s (Cervantes’s Fernando) betrayal of Violante
(Dorotea) and Julio (Cardenio) in order to wed Leonora (Luscinda)
made critics first consider the play a forgery, and then a heavily cut
version of the original—Gary Taylor and John V. Nance have called it
‘half a play’.95 The possible content of the other half has divided critics
between conjectures on a subplot based on El curioso impertinente and
the admission of a possible presence of Don Quixote and Sancho as
protagonists of a secondary plot to a main plot about the four lovers, a
conjecture that has recently found its most eminent defender in Roger
Chartrier, whose argument is based on seventeenth-century adaptations
of the same material in Spain and France.96
While criticism of The History of Cardenio continues to scrutinize
Theobald’s text for traces of Fletcher and Shakespeare, modern literary
recreations of the lost play also relegate Theobald in favour of the
original authors. Charles David Ley renamed his Spanish translation of
Double Falsehood as Historia de Cardenio (1987), and attributed the play
to Shakespeare and Fletcher, in that order.97 Charles Mee and Stephen
Greenblatt’s Cardenio (2003) freely combined Cervantes’s plot of El
curioso impertinente with a play within a play based on a lost script by
Shakespeare.98 This play became the basis for a project involving
performances of new recreations all over the world. And Gary Taylor
conceived his rewriting as a ‘posthumous’ collaboration with Fletcher
and Shakespeare in the attempt to ‘unadapt Theobald’s adaptation’ on
grounds of scholarly knowledge of the writing style and theatrical
practices of the original authors. Taylor’s subplot concerns ‘Quesada, an
old schoolmaster, who becomes a mad knight-errant, calling himself
“DON QUIXOT”’,99 and, much in the tone of Beaumont’s The Knight of
the Burning Pestle, fully recreates Don Quixote’s adventures in Sierra
Morena and the Inn, including Dorotea’s (now called Violenta) disguise
as Princess Micomicona.
The fictional fantasy of bringing together Don Quixote and
Shakespeare is played out by Robin Chapman’s novel Shakespeare’s Don
Quixote (2011). Chapman chooses to write ‘a novel in dialogue creating
what might have been’,100 in which a narrator presents to the reader a
fringe production of a play advertised as ‘Shakespeare’s Don Quixote’.
The dialogue of the play, mixing verse and prose, emerges beside the
interludes, in which the reincarnated ghosts of Cervantes, Shakespeare,
Fletcher, and Theobald give their opinions about the play. These
dialogues reveal Fletcher’s responsibility for the design and most of the
writing of the lost original, Shakespeare’s hand being reduced to a
comic subplot with Don Quixote as a protagonist. Little by little,
Fletcher becomes marginalized and the friendly dialogue between
Shakespeare and Cervantes discovers their mutual admiration, and
their appreciation of the play that they are watching. The play within
the novel very much seems, in spite of its style, Robin Chapman’s
restitution of an ideal Shakespearean version of Cervantes, casting Don
Quixote and Sancho as main protagonists, and using Sierra Morena and
the inn as ideal settings for confronting reality and fantasy, sanity and
madness, love and betrayal.
The second loss involves the abovementioned trials by British
filmmaker Terry Gilliam to direct a Cervantes-based feature-length
entitled The Man Who Killed Don Quixote. Gilliam began preproduction
in 1998, with an unprecedentedly high budget for a European film
though still below the project’s actual needs, and with a cast including
French actors Jean Rochefort and Vanessa Paradis as Don Quixote and
Altisidora, and American film star Johnny Depp as Toby Grisoni, a
twenty-first century advertising executive thrown back to seventeenth-
century Spain to replace Sancho Panza in the knight’s adventures. Later
attempts at relaunching the project have ended up in a new production
during the spring of 2017 and final release on 1 July 2018, involving a
different cast and a screenplay that, in Gilliam’s own words, reads as a
Cervantine moral fable about ‘how movies can damage people’.101 In
2002, Keith Fulton and Louis Pepe’s Lost in La Mancha, ironically
advertised as the first ‘unmaking-of documentary’, interweaved the
disastrous circumstances leading to Gilliam’s failure with sequences
that offer the viewer the masterpiece that the initial project could have
been as if it were already made.102
Despite their many differences, The History of Cardenio and The Man
Who Killed Don Quixote spectrally comprise the four-hundred-year
history of Cervantes’s reception in Britain. Their transitional nature—
between lost and found, between being and non-being—emblematizes
the status of Cervantic/Cervantean literature as an unfinished but
inexhaustible reality, fostering renewed forms of imitation, recreation,
and reinvention. The enduring power of Cervantes’s imagination will
continue to provide pretexts for the most gifted literary minds to
transform windmills into giants.
Works Cited
Ardila, J. A. G. ‘Henry Fielding: From Quixotic Satire to Cervantean Novel’. In
The Cervantean Heritage, edited by Ardila, pp. 124–41.
Ardila, J. A. G. ‘Sancho Panza en Inglaterra: Sancho at Court de James Ayres y
Barataria de Frederick Pilon’. Bulletin of Hispanic Studies 82, no. 5 (2005): pp.
551–69.
Ardila, J. A. G., editor. The Cervantean Heritage: Reception and Influence of
Cervantes in Britain (London: MHRA/Maney, 2009).
Ardila, J. A. G. ‘The Influence and Reception of Cervantes in Britain’. In The
Cervantean Heritage, edited by Ardila, pp. 2–31.
Ardila, J. A. G. ‘Tobias Smollett, Don Quixote, and the Emergence of the English
Novel’. In The Cervantean Heritage, edited by Ardila, pp. 151–65.
Astrana Marín, Luis. Vida ejemplar y heroica de Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra: con
mil documentos hasta ahora inéditos y numerosas ilustraciones y grabados de
época, 7 vols (Madrid: Instituto Reus, 1958).
Bando Domínguez, Juana. ‘La huella cervantina en The Battle of the Books de
Jonathan Swift’. In La huella de Cervantes, edited by José Manuel Barrio
Marco and María José Crespo Allué, pp. 105–12.
Barrio Marco, José Manuel and María José Crespo Allué, editors. La huella de
Cervantes y del Quijote en la cultura anglosajona (Valladolid: Secretariado de
Publicaciones de la Universidad de Valladolid, 2007).
Bautista Naranjo, Esther. La recepción y reescritura del mito de Don Quijote en
Inglaterra (siglos XVII–XIX) (Madrid: Dyckinson, 2015).
Booth, Wayne C. ‘The Self-Conscious Narrator in Comic Fiction before Tristam
Shandy’. PMLA 67 (1952): pp. 163–85.
Bowers, Fredson, general editors. The Dramatic Works in the Beaumont and
Fletcher Canon, vol. VIII (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992).
Borham Puyal, Miriam. ‘Reading Don Quixote as Political Agent: A Spanish
Knight in British Ideological and Literary Wars’. ES: Revista de Filología Inglesa
33 (2012): pp. 7–25.
Burgess, Anthony. ‘A Meeting in Valladolid’. In The Devil’s Mode (London:
Hutchinson, 1989), pp. 5–21.
Burton, Robert. The Anatomy of Melancholy, edited by Holbrook Jackson (New
York: New York Review Books, 2001).
Byrd, Max. Tristam Shandy (London: Routledge, 1985).
Cano Echevarría, Berta. ‘La España anacrónica del Monsignor Quixote de Graham
Greene’. In La huella de Cervantes y del Quijote en la cultura anglosajona, edited
by José Manuel Barrio Marco and María José Crespo Allué, pp. 292–9.
Carnegie, David and Gary Taylor, editors The Quest for Cardenio: Shakespeare,
Fletcher, Cervantes and the Lost Play (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Don Quijote de La Mancha, edited by Francisco Rico
(Barcelona: Galaxia Gutemberg, 2004 [second edition 2012]).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Don Quixote, translated by John Ormsby (Pennsylvania
University Press, 2000). [E-text of the 1922 translation].
Cervantes, Miguel de. Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda, edited by Florencio
Sevilla Arroyo and Antonio Rey Hazas (Madrid: Alianza, 1999).
Cervantes, Miguel de. The Travels of Persiles and Sigismunda: A Northern History
(London: H[umphrey] L[ownes], 1619).
Chapman, Robin. Pasamonte’s Life (Oxford: Aris & Phillips, 2005).
Chapman, Robin. Sancho’s Golden Age (Oxford: Aris & Phillips, 2004).
Chapman, Robin. Shakespeare’s Don Quixote (London: Book Now, 2012).
Chapman, Robin. The Duchess’s Diary (London: Sinclair-Stevenson, 1990).
Chartrier, Roger. Cardenio between Shakespeare and Cervantes: The Story of a Lost
Play (Cambridge: Polity, 2013).
Chesterton, G. K. ‘The Divine Parody of Don Quixote’. In A Handful of Authors
(London: Sheed & Ward, 1953), pp. 24–7.
Chesterton, G. K. The Return of Don Quixote (West Valley City, UT: Waking Lion
Press, 2006 [first edition 1927])
Clark, Sandra. ‘Cervantes’s “The Curious Impertinent” in Some Jacobean Plays’.
Bulletin of Hispanic Studies 79, no. 4 (2002): pp. 477–99.
Clemans, Josh. ‘The Joker and the Fool: Miguel de Cervantes and G. K.
Chesterton’. Shield Wall: A Journal of Theological Poetics 1, no. 1 (2015): pp.
1–32.
Darby, T[rudi] L. ‘Resistance to Rape in Persiles y Sigismunda and The Custom of
the Country’. Modern Language Review 90, no. 2 (1995): pp. 273–84.
Darby, Trudi L. and Alexander Samson. ‘Cervantes on the Jacobean Stage’. In
The Cervantean Heritage, edited by J.A.G. Ardila, pp. 206–22.
Della Gatta, Carla. ‘Cultural Mobility and Transitioning Authority: Stephen
Greenblatt’s Cardenio Project’. In The Quest for Cardenio, edited by David
Carnegie and Gary Taylor, pp. 329–45.
Dickens, Charles. The Pickwick Papers, edited by Robert L. Patten
(Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1986).
Dolder, Ernst. Henry Fielding’s ‘Don Quixote in England’ (Bern: Leemann & Co.,
1907).
Donnell, Sidney. ‘Quixotic Storytelling, Lost in La Mancha, and the Unmaking of
The Man Who Killed Don Quixote’. Romance Quarterly 52, no. 2 (2006): pp. 92–
112.
Dotras Bravo, Alexia. Los trabajos cervantinos de Salvador de Madariaga: Historia
de una idea (Alcalá de Henares: Centro de Estudios Cervantinos, 2008).
Dryden, John. ‘Preface to Fables Ancient and Modern’. In Dryden: A Selection,
edited by John Conaghan (London: Methuen, 1978): pp. 607–26.
Fernández-Morera, Darío, and Michael Hanke, editors. Cervantes in the English-
Speaking World: New Essays (Kassel: Reichenberger, 2005).
Fielding, Henry. Don Quixote in England (London: J. Watts, 1734).
Fielding, Henry. Joseph Andrews and Shamela, edited by Douglas Brooks-Davies
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999).
Fielding, Henry (Sir Alexander Drawncasir). The Covent-Garden Journal, edited
by Edward Jensen (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1925).
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, John. Cervantes in England (London: British Academy/Henry
Frowde/Oxford University Press, 1905).
Fletcher, John, and Philip Massinger. The Custom of the Country, edited by Cyrus
Hoy. In The Dramatic Works in the Beaumont and Fletcher Canon, edited by
David Carnegie and Gary Taylor, vol. VIII, pp. 633–758.
Frazier, Harriet C. ‘Theobald’s Double Falsehood: A Revision of Shakespeare’s
Cardenio?’. Comparative Drama 1, no. 3 (1967): pp. 219–33.
Freehafer, John. ‘Cardenio, by Shakespeare and Fletcher’. PMLA 84, no. 3
(1969): pp. 501–13.
Friedman, Edward H. ‘Robin Chapman’s The Duchess’s Diary and the Other Side
of Imitation’. In The Cervantean Heritage, edited by J. A. G. Ardila, pp. 196–
204.
Fulton, Keith and Lois Pepe. Lost in La Mancha (Optimum Releasing, 2002).
Gale, Steven H. ‘The Relationship between Beaumont’s The Knight of the Burning
Pestle and Cervantes’s Don Quixote’. Anales cervantinos 11, no. 1 (1972): pp.
87–96.
Garrett, Erin Webster. ‘Recycling Zoraida: The Muslim Heroine in Mary
Shelley’s Frankenstein’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America
20, no. 1 (2000): pp. 133–56.
Gaston, Patricia S. ‘The Waverley Series and Don Quixote: Manuscripts Found
and Lost’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 11, no. 1
(1991): pp. 45–59.
Goetsch, Paul. ‘Charles Dickens’s The Pickwick Papers and Don Quixote’. In
Cervantes in the English-Speaking World: New Essays, edited by Darío
Fernández-Morera and Michael Hanke, pp. 143–57.
Gordon, Scott Paul. ‘Female Quixotism: Charlotte Lennox and Tabitha Tenney’.
In Cervantes in the English-Speaking World: New Essays, edited by Darío
Fernández-Morera and Michael Hanke, pp. 127–41.
Greenblatt, Stephen, The Cardenio Project: An Experiment in Cultural Mobility.
<http://www.fas.harvard.edu/~cardenio/>, (accessed 28 September 2016).
Hammond, Brean S. ‘Mid-Century English Quixotism and the Defence of the
Novel’. Eighteenth-Century Fiction 10, no. 3 (1998): pp. 247–68.
Hammond, Brean S. ‘The Cervantic Legacy in the Eighteenth-Century Novel’. In
The Cervantean Heritage, edited by J.A.G. Ardila, pp. 96–103.
Jackson, Macdonald P. ‘Looking for Shakespeare in Double Falsehood: Stylistic
Evidence’. In The Quest for Cardenio, edited by David Carnegie and Gary
Taylor, pp. 133–61.
Kleber, Felicitas. ‘Laurence Sterne’s Tristam Shandy and Don Quixote’. In
Cervantes in the English-Speaking World, pp. 65–80.
Lázaro Lafuente, Alberto. ‘Estampas del Quijote en la novela británica
contemporánea’. In La huella de Cervantes y del Quijote en la cultura
anglosajona, edited by José Manuel Barrio Marco and María José Crespo
Allué, pp. 253–77.
Levin, Harry. ‘The Quixotic Principle: Cervantes and Other Novelists’. Harvard
English Studies 1 (1970): pp. 45–66.
Luis-Martínez, Zenón and Luis Gómez Canseco (eds). Entre Shakespeare y
Cervantes: Sendas del Renacimiento/Between Shakespeare and Cervantes: Trails
along the Renaissance (Newark: Juan de la Cuesta, 2006).
Madariaga, Salvador de (1926). Guía del lector del Quijote (Barcelona: Stella
Maris, 2016).
Mancing, Howard. Cervantes’s Don Quixote: A Reference Guide (London:
Greenwood, 2006).
Mancing, Howard. ‘The Quixotic Novel in British Fiction of the Nineteenth and
Twentieth Centuries’. In The Cervantean Heritage, edited by J. A. G. Ardila, pp.
104–16.
Middleton, Thomas. The Lady’s Tragedy, edited by Julia Briggs. In The Collected
Works of Thomas Middleton, edited by Gary Taylor and John Lavagnino, pp.
833–906.
Middleton, Thomas. Your Five Gallants (1607), edited by Ralph Alan Cohen and
John Jowett. In The Collected Works of Thomas Middleton, edited by Gary
Taylor and John Lavagnino, pp. 594–636.
Mora, María José. ‘The Casting of Sancho in Durfey’s The Comical History of Don
Quixote, Parts I-II (1694)’. SEDERI 25 (2015): pp. 155–67.
Nicoll, Allardyce. A History of Restoration Drama: 1660–1700 (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1923).
Pardo (García), Pedro Javier. ‘El Siglo de Oro del Quijote en la literatura inglesa,
1740–1780’. In La huella de Cervantes y del Quijote en la cultura anglosajona,
edited by José Manuel Barrio Marco and María José Crespo Allué, pp. 133–
58.
Pardo (García), Pedro Javier. ‘Formas de imitación del Quijote en la novela
inglesa del XVIII: Joseph Andrews y Tristam Shandy’. Anales Cervantinos 33
(1995–97): pp. 133–64.
Pardo (García), Pedro Javier. ‘La tradición cervantina en la novela inglesa: de
Henry Fielding a William Tackeray’. In Entre Cervantes y Shakespeare, edited
by Zenón Luis-Martínez & Luis Gómez Canseco, pp. 73–111.
Pardo (García), Pedro Javier. ‘Tobias Smollett’s Humphry Clinker and the
Cervantine Tradition in Eighteenth-Century England’. In Cervantes in the
English-Speaking World: New Essays, edited by Darío Fernández-Morera and
Michael Hanke, pp. 81–106.
Pawl, Amy J. ‘Feminine Transformations of the Quijote in Eighteenth-Century
England: Lennox’s The Female Quixote and Her Sisters’. In The Cervantean
Heritage, edited by J. A. G. Ardila, pp. 166–75.
Portillo García, Rafael. ‘El Quijote en el teatro de la Restauración inglesa (1660–
1714): El caso de Thomas D’Urfey’. In La huella de Cervantes y del Quijote en la
cultura anglosajona, edited by José Manuel Barrio Marco and María José
Crespo Allué, pp. 93–101.
Proudfoot, Richard. ‘Can Double Falsehood be a Mere Forgery by Lewis
Theobald?’. In The Quest for Cardenio, edited by David Carnegie and Gary
Taylor, pp. 162–79.
Pujante, Ángel-Luis. ‘El Cardenio, o los avatares de una obra perdida’.
Monteagudo 10 (2005): pp. 51–63.
Pujante, Ángel-Luis. ‘Nostalgia for the Cervantes-Shakespeare Link: Charles
David Ley’s Historia de Cardenio’. In The Quest for Cardenio, edited by David
Carnegie and Gary Taylor, pp. 318–28.
Pulver, Andrew. ‘Terry Gilliam Gets Greenlight to Restart Don Quixote Film’.
The Guradian, 1 April 2016. https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/
apr/01/terry-gilliam-to-restart-don-quixote-cervantes-film-john-hurt-jack-o-
connell (accessed 28 September 2016).
Randall, Dale B. and Jackson C. Boswell. Cervantes in Seventeenth-Century
England: The Tapestry Turned (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009).
Riley, Edward C. ‘Cervantine Succession. Review of Robin Chapman, The
Duchess’s Diary’. Times Literary Supplement, 29 February 1980, p. 238.
Rosenbach, Abraham S. Wolf. ‘The Curious-Impertinent in English Dramatic
Literature before Shelton’s Translation of Don Quixote’. Modern Language Notes
17, no. 6 (1902): pp. 179–84.
Samson, Alexander. ‘“Last thought upon a windmill”?: Cervantes and Fletcher’.
In The Cervantean Heritage, edited by J.A.G. Ardila, pp. 223–33.
Sánchez Imizcoz, Ruth. ‘La influencia de Don Quijote en El caballero del pistadero
ardiente’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 15, no. 2
(1995): 75–82.
Schenkel, Elmar. ‘G. K. Chesterton: The Return of Don Quixote’. In Cervantes in
the English Speaking World, edited by Darío Fernández-Morera and Michael
Hanke, pp. 169–80.
Schevill, Rudolph. ‘Theobald’s Double Falsehood?’. Modern Philology 9, no. 2
(1911): pp. 269–85.
Scott, Sir Walter. Waverley, or ‘Tis Sixty Tears Since (London: J. M. Dent, 1906).
Shelley, Mary. ‘Life of Cervantes’. In Lives of the Most Eminent Literary and
Scientific Men of Spain and Portugal (London: Longman, 1837), pp. 120–88.
Smollett, Tobias. ‘Life of Cervantes’. In The History and Adventures of the
Renowned Don Quixote…In Four Volumes, translated by Smollett, vol. I
(Dublin: John Chambers, 1796.
Smollett, Tobias. The Adventures of Roderick Random, edited by Paul-Gabriel
Boucé (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1981).
Smollett, Tobias, The Adventures of Sir Launcelot Greaves, Together with The
History & Adventures of an Atom (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1926).
Smollett, Tobias. The Expedition of Humphry Clinker, edited by Lewis M. Knapp
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988).
Staves, Susan, ‘Don Quixote in Eighteenth-Century England’. Comparative
Literature 24, no. 1 (1972): pp. 193–215.
Sterne, Laurence. The Life and Opinions of Tristam Shandy, edited by Graham
Petrie (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1967).
Tabarés Pérez, Patricia and Leonor Pérez Ruiz. ‘The Praise of Quixotic Delicacy
in David Hume’s “Of the Standard of Taste”‘. In La huella de Cervantes y del
Quijote en la cultura anglosajona, edited by José Manuel Barrio Marco and
María José Crespo Allué, pp. 121–31.
Tave, Stuart. The Amiable Humorist: A Study in the Comic Theory and Criticism of
the 18th and 19th Centuries (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1960).
Taylor, Gary. ‘The History of Cardenio: 1612–2012’. In The Creation and Re-
Creation of Cardenio: Performing Shakespeare, Transforming Cervantes, edited by
Terri Bourus and Taylor (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013), pp. 235–316.
Taylor, Gary. ‘The History of The History of Cardenio’. In The Quest for Cardenio,
edited by David Carnegie and Gary Taylor, pp. 11–61.
Taylor, Gary and John Lavagnino, general editors. Thomas Middleton: The
Collected Works (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007).
Taylor, Gary and John V. Nance. ‘Four Characters in Search for a Subplot:
Quixote, Sancho, and Cardenio’. In The Quest for Cardenio, edited by David
Carnegie and Taylor, pp. 192–213.
Theobald, Lewis. Double Falsehood or The Distressed Lovers, edited by Brean
Hammond (London: Methuen, 2010).
Torralbo Caballero, Juan de Dios and Cristina María Gámez Fernández. ‘La
influencia de Viaje del Parnaso en The Battle of the Books’. In La huella de
Cervantes, edited by José Manuel Barrio Marco and María José Crespo Allué,
pp. 113–20.
Vega Rodríguez, Pilar. ‘El regreso de D. Quijote de Chesterton. Tradición y
utopía’. Anales Cervantinos 37 (2005): pp. 239–51.
Wilkins, George. The Miseries of Inforst Marriage (London: George Vincent,
1607).
Wilson, Diana de Armas. Allegories of Love: Cervantes’s Persiles and Sigismunda
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1991).
1 Wilkins, sig. F1r.
2 Middleton, Your Five Gallants, IV.6.7–8, p. 626.
3 Fulton and Pepe.
4 Levin, p. 47.
5 On the distinction between imitation and emulation, see Levin, p. 47, and
Pardo García, ‘La tradición cervantina…’, pp. 73–7. On the uses of ‘quixotic’,
‘Cervantean’, ‘Cervantic’, and ‘Cervantine’, see Ardila, ‘The Influence…’, pp. 11–
15.
6 Cervantes, Los trabajos…, p. 275; The Travels…, p. 221.
7 Cervantes, Los trabajos…, p. 279; p. 225.
8 Darby and Samson, p. 211; Samson, p. 223.
9 For a longer list, see Ardila, ‘The Influence…’, pp. 3–4.
10 On Beaumont’s play and Don Quixote, see Gale and Sánchez Imizcoz.
11 Darby and Samson, p. 217.
12 Darby and Samson, pp. 214–19; See also Rosenbach and Clark.
13 Middleton, The Lady’s Tragedy, I.2.53–57, p. 847.
14 Cervantes, Don Quijote, p. 421; Don Quixote, p. 257.
15 Darby and Samson, pp. 215–19.
16 Darby and Samson, pp. 209–10.
17 Samson, pp. 229–30.
18 Ardila, ‘The Influence…’, p. 6; Fitzmaurice-Kelly, pp. 13–14.
19 Cervantes, The Travels…, p. 58.
20 Samson, p. 227; Darby, p. 274.
21 Darby, pp. 273–81.
22 Darby, p. 276.
23 Dryden, p. 625.
24 Fletcher and Massinger, IV.4.14, p. 710.
25 Wilson, pp. 191–9.
26 Nicoll, pp. 179–80.
27 Burton, p. 93. On John Locke and Don Quixote, see Bautista Naranjo, p. 45.
28 See Portillo García and Mora.
29 Dolder; Hammond, ‘The Cervantic Legacy…’, pp. 97–8.
30 Ardila, ‘The Influence…’, p. 7.
31 See Bando Domínguez; Torralbo Caballero and Gómez Fernández.
32 Tabarés Pérez and Pérez Ruiz.
33 I borrow the term from Pardo, ‘El Siglo…’.
34 Ardila, ‘Sancho Panza en Inglaterra’.
35 Hammond, ‘The Cervantic…’, p. 98, and ‘Mid-Century…’.
36 Fielding, Joseph Andrews, p. 1.
37 Pardo García, ‘Formas de Imitación…’, pp. 135–45; Ardila, ‘Henry
Fielding’, 126–32.
38 Fielding, Joseph Andrews, pp. 3–4.
39 Fielding, Joseph Andrews, pp. 163–4.
40 Fielding, Joseph Andrews, pp. 162–3.
41 Hammond, ‘Mid-Century…’, p. 262.
42 Sterne, III.19, p. 201.
43 Sterne, I.10, pp. 47–8, 51.
44 Staves, pp. 202–4; Kleber, pp. 71–7; Byrd, pp. 34–8.
45 Pardo García, ‘Formas de imitación…’, pp. 145–58.
46 Booth, p. 167.
47 Ardila, ‘Tobias Smollett, Don Quixote…’, p. 151.
48 Smollett, ‘Life of Cervantes’, n.p.
49 Smollett, Roderick Random, p. xxiv.
50 Pardo, ‘Tobias Smollett’s…’, p. 83.
51 Ardila, ‘Tobias Smollett…’, p. 160.
52 Smollett, The Expedition of Humphry Clinker, p. 188.
53 Pardo, ‘Tobias Smollett’s…’, pp. 83–92.
54 Tave, pp. 140–63.
55 Fielding, in The Covent-Garden Journal, pp. 279–82.
56 Pawl; Gordon, ‘Female Quixotism’.
57 Smollett, The Adventures of Sir Launcelot Greaves…, p. 18.
58 Smollett, The Adventures of Sir Launcelot Greaves…, p. 16.
59 Levin, p. 54.
60 Ardila, ‘Tobias Smollett, Don Quixote’, pp. 159–60.
61 Borham Puyal, pp. 13–14.
62 I borrow the phrase from Staves, who defines it as: ‘a character driven
mad by the reading of nonfiction’ (p. 200).
63 Scott, p. 82.
64 Scott, p. 83.
65 Gaston, p. 48.
66 Shelley, p. 142.
67 Shelley, p. 120.
68 Mancing, ‘The Quixotic Novel…’, p. 106; Garrett.
69 Mancing, ‘The Quixotic Novel…’, pp. 107–8.
70 Goetsch, pp. 145–54.
71 Dickens, pp. 115–16.
72 Pardo, ‘El Siglo…’, p. 155.
73 Ardila, ‘The Influence and Reception’, p. 22; Mancing, ‘The Quixotic
Novel’, p. 112; Lázaro Lafuente.
74 Mancing, ‘The Quixotic Novel…’, pp. 109–12.
75 Schenkel, pp. 169–70.
76 Chesterton, ‘The Divine Parody’, p. 27.
77 Schenkel, p. 173; Vega Rodríguez, pp. 241–3; Clemans, pp. 8–14.
78 For a larger exploration of this issue, see Clemans.
79 Chesterton, The Return of Don Quixote, p. 207 (original emphasis).
80 On Greene’s portrait of Spain, see Cano Echevarría.
81 Madariaga, Guía…, pp. 139–63. On Unamuno and Madariaga’s reading of
Don Quixote, see Dotras Bravo, pp. 220–39. On Madariaga’s influence on
Greene, see Lázaro Lafuente, p. 271.
82 Cervantes, Don Quijote, pp. 1115; p. 650.
83 For an engaging study of this novel, see Friedman.
84 Chapman, Sancho’s Golden Age, p. 84.
85 Chapman, Pasamonte’s Life, Preface.
86 Riley, p. 238.
87 Recent accounts of the vicissitudes of this lost play can be found in
Chartrier. See also Taylor, ‘The History of The History of Cardenio’.
88 Astrana Marín, v. VI, pp. 32–6, 57–8. On the embassy and related
documents, see Randall and Boswell, pp. 1–4.
89 Astrana Marín, p. 58; Burgess, ‘A Meeting in Valladolid’, pp. 15–18.
90 See Hammond’s ‘Introduction’ to Double Falsehood, and particularly his
final words (p. 160).
91 London Journal, 10 May 1727, quoted in Hammond, ‘Introduction’ to
Double Falsehood, p. 11 (original emphasis).
92 Theobald, p. 162.
93 Theobald, Prologue, pp. 1–7.
94 Theobald, p. 169.
95 Taylor and Nance, p. 192. On the forgery theory, see Schevill and Frazier.
On refutations of this theory, see Freehafer. More recent research on
Shakespeare’s possible hand in the original used by Theobald are Jackson and
Proudfoot.
96 Chartrier, pp. 30–76.
97 On Ley’s translation, see Pujante, ‘El Cardenio’ and ‘Nostalgia for the
Cervantes-Shakespeare Link’.
98 Greenblatt, The Cardenio Project: An Experiment in Cultural Mobility,
<http://www.fas.harvard.edu/~cardenio/>. On Greenblatt’s project and play,
see Della Gatta.
99 Taylor, ‘The History…’, pp. 237 and 241.
100 Chapman, Shakespeare’s Don Quixote, Preliminary Note.
101 Pulver.
102 Donnell, pp. 97 and 98.
Chapter 27
Cervantes in/on the Americas
Diana de Armas Wilson
University of Denver
Don Quixote is the True American. You do not have to look into
many American eyes to suddenly meet somewhere the beautiful
grave lunacy of his gaze.
—Tennessee Williams
Peru and Plymouth Rock
‘En un lugar de las Indias’ [‘In a place in the Indies’] mimics the
opening line of Don Quixote and serves as the title of a short story by
the Colombian writer Pedro Gómez Valderrama about Cervantes in
America. In this witty fiction, unlike in life, Cervantes manages to
secure a post in Cartagena de Indias. This was, in fact, one of four
vacant managerial positions for which the real-life Cervantes, a maimed
veteran of Spain’s wars against the Ottomans, unsuccessfully petitioned
the Council of the Indies in 1590. A bureaucrat’s utopian response to
his application, in a marginal note using the discourse of chivalry,
suggested that Cervantes should confine his job search to Spain:
‘busque por acá en qué se le haga merced’ [‘look around here for
favours’].1
In Gómez Valderrama’s story, however, a middle-aged Cervantes on
the verge of applying for public charity is suddenly offered a job as
auditor of the galleys in Cartagena. Sailing out of Seville, this fictional
Cervantes arrives in the New World in time to witness an auto de fe in
Cartagena’s Plaza Mayor. Tropical torpor slowly converts him into a
stereotypical indiano, an indolent Spanish colonist. Consumed by
alcohol and lust for his mulata servant, he comes to a melancholy end
and burns his books. This cautionary tale suggests that securing his
desired New World position kept Cervantes from writing a masterpiece.
A different fictional ending might have portrayed him writing Don
Quixote while working in Cartagena. Such a happy finale, however,
might distress Cervantes’s French biographer Jean Canavaggio, who
claims that the ‘renown’ of Don Quixote would have suffered had he
come ‘into the world under the skies of Colombia or Guatemala’.2
Although the historical Cervantes was denied a post in the Indies,
his ‘hijo feo’3 or ‘ugly son’,4 as Don Quixote is called in the novel’s
Prologue, went there in his place. A Cuban legend would have it that a
copy of Don Quixote arrived in the belly of a shark captured off the
island’s waters in 1936.5 Centuries earlier, however, seventy-two copies
of Juan de la Cuesta’s first edition of the novel made it to the Indies in
1606 as part of a larger consignment of books shipped from Seville by
the book dealer Juan de Sarria. His son met the shipment at the coastal
town of Puertobelo and escorted the books on a pack train of mules
across the isthmus to Old Panama, a steamy Pacific coastal city
surrounded by pirates and cimarrones, or fugitive slaves. The books
then sailed down the Pacific coast to Lima, arriving there in mid-1606.
Nine repacked copies of this princeps edition would take a further
harrowing two-month mule trip up the cold punas of the Andes, across
swinging rope bridges, to arrive in Cuzco. We know about this bookish
journey thanks to the discovery, by Irving A. Leonard, of a receipt of
delivery that had for centuries languished in the National Archive of
Peru.6 Leonard’s tracing of this single consignment of books has been
justly called the ‘greatest contribution’ in the annals of book-trade
transactions.7
The year 1606 was only the beginning of Don Quixote’s itinerary in
the Americas. By 1607—the same year that the English were founding
the Jamestown settlement in Virginia—an obscure Peruvian mining
town called Pausa was celebrating a knightly joust with masquerades.
The prize-winning entry in these lists was by one Luis de Gálvez from
Córdoba, who received an award of four yards of purple satin for his
burlesque impersonation of El caballero de la triste figura [The Knight of
the Sad Countenance]. Raquel Chang-Rodríguez provides readers a
meticulous Spanish analysis of the workings of this celebration in
colonial Pausa.8
A mere generation later, as this essay aims to show, readers arriving
in colonial New England would give evidence that they knew
Cervantes’s knight. Mindful of the great distance between Pausa and
Plymouth, Massachusetts, between a Peruvian silver mine and a Puritan
‘city on the hill’, I regard these two early American sites as curiously
united by the reading of Don Quixote. Rather than comprehensive, the
remarks that follow about Cervantes on/in the Americas are merely
representative. For thirty-six pages of bibliographical entries on the
matter of Cervantes and the Americas, see Corréa-Díaz. For Spanish
works that address this vast topic, readers may turn to the following
authors and/or editors: Santa, Illades and Iffland, López Martínez,
Brioso Santos, and Miró Quesada Sosa. A collection in English, edited
by Vélez-Sainz and Romero-Díaz, includes fifteen essays that further
open out the topic. An essay in English by Finch and Allen provides a
condensed but lively account of both North and South American writers
influenced by Cervantes.
Cervantes on the Americas
Instead of Pausa, Cervantes would devote various references to Potosí,
the most productive and, for the Andean Indians who worked there, the
most deadly silver mine of the era. In the ornamental description in
Don Quixote of Clavileño, the wooden horse is said to magically fly one
day to France, the next to Potosí.9 The Peruvian mine surfaces again
when Don Quixote is fretting about how to reimburse Sancho for the
lashes undertaken toward the disenchantment of Dulcinea: ‘las minas
de Potosí fueran poco para pagarte’ [‘the mines of Potosí would not
suffice to pay you’].10 Careful readers, including Herman Melville (see
below), may find in Cervantes a darker glimpse of the original
American connotations of Potosí.
Well beyond its silver mines, references to the New World abound in
the Cervantine canon. In the novella El celoso extremeño, the rightly
termed ‘possessive and paranoid’ Felipe de Carrizales sails off to the
Indies at age forty-eight in quest of gold and fame.11 In a discussion of
this desire for fame, Don Quixote rounds off a series of examples from
antiquity with a reference to Hernán Cortés, whose frenzy for renown
drove him to arson in America. As Don Quixote puts it, fame moved ‘el
cortesísimo Cortés’ [‘the very courteous Cortés’] to burn his ships so
that his soldiers would have no thought of retreat or desertion.12 The
use of the superlative cortesísimo here suggests an excess of knightly
toadying. Cortés was much given to chivalric language, and the
bombast evident in his formulaic challenges anticipates many of Don
Quixote’s own later challenges. Although Cortés died the same year
Cervantes was born, the conquistador’s fame underscores the cliché
that old soldiers never die. Cortés rises again in the Cervantine canon,
when the hero of El licenciado Vidriera mentions the ‘gran Hernando
Cortés, que conquistó la gran Méjico…espanto del mundo nuevo’ [‘the
great Hernando Cortés, who conquered the great Mexico…the wonder
of the new world’].13 A less celebrated resident of Mexico materializes
when the enchanted Dulcinea is bucked off her ‘palfrey’ and takes a
running leap to remount it. At that point Sancho claims that she could
teach ‘a subir a la jineta al más diestro cordobés o mejicano’ [‘the most
skilled Cordoban or Mexican rider about mounting a horse’].14
Palfreys abound in the books of chivalry, whose heroes generally
subjugate a barbaric enemy—often a swarthy-faced infidel––and
liberate a foreign princess or two. The codes of chivalric romance are
generically fixed around love and war, around damsels in distress and
infidels in need of liberation or salvation. The knightly figure who
undertakes these salvific acts, and whose exploits enchant Don Quixote,
is a demurely modest, high-minded, violence-attuned gentleman. The
books of chivalry romanticized an imagined illustrious pseudo-
Carolingian past while simultaneously serving the aims of the Habsburg
empire’s nobility. The term chivalry is as slippery as the term empire,
but they are related through a shared ideology. Although chivalry has
multiple meanings, from heavy cavalry to perfect manners, the term
cannot be divorced from the following: a culture of horsiness, a frontier
mentality, a role in imperial expansion, an ideology of good and evil, a
respect for formulaic behaviour, an ease with violence, and a salvific
complex (‘cavalry to the rescue’). When transplanted to the Americas,
chivalry replaced knights with conquistadors and cowboys. All three
populations display links to the quixotic. As American myths go, the
East was settled but the West was won. With a change of language and
outfit, Don Quixote, an unbalanced man who lights out for the
wilderness in the hopes of making history, could be translated into the
American genre of the Western.
But how did Cervantes’s knight shape the identities of America’s first
European settlers? The Peruvian scholar Raúl Porras Barrenechea once
called Don Quixote ‘una sátira benévola del conquistador de ínsulas o
Indias’ [‘a benevolent satire of the conquistador of ínsulas or Indies’].15
As targets of Cervantes’s satire, both the fictional ínsulas and the real
world Indies presume an understanding of Spain’s imperial reach.
Cervantes’s posthumous Persiles continues the benevolent satire of the
American conquest begun in Don Quixote. Cervantes moulded
Amerindian subject matter into the ‘dark conceit’ that introduces the
Persiles, a text that opens with a sustained six-chapter parody ‘On
Cannibals’ that portrays the symbolic acts of a world conqueror.16
Michael Armstrong-Roche elegantly sums up not only the major
material features in Cervantes’s Persiles that point to the New World
—‘the animal skins and bows and arrows, rafts, unminted gold ore and
pearls for currency’—but also ‘the motifs of island-hopping, shipwreck,
captivity, and ritual cannibalism’. To these he adds a cluster of themes
that trigger powerful American resonances: ‘conversion, miscegenation,
cultural alienation, translation, and barbarism’.17 In works dealing with
the Americas, Cervantes shows both the danger and costs of the
imperial thrust. Sections of both Don Quijote and the Persiles allegorize
for us the transit of empire, its rise and fall, its victims and its
barbarians. In Cervantes, the Novel, and the New World, I argue that the
crazed hero contained by Don Quixote (or barely contained by it)
ridicules, among other things, fantasies of global conquest.
Cervantes’s recreation of New World themes suggests a powerful
critique of wars of conquest, beginning with, although by no means
confined to, the conquests in America. Spain’s understanding of its
imperial standing had been shifting across the sixteenth century, when
the term imperium moved from its old Latinate sense of autonomous
power to its newer sense of territorial dominion. By applying the term
conquistador to their New World adventures, as Henry Kamen argues,
Spaniards were ‘claiming imperial status for the enterprise’.18 And as
Sir J. H. Elliott reminds us, Cervantes formed part of ‘the last great
imperial generation of Spaniards after the triumphs of the sixteenth
century’.19 He lived in an age when Spain’s exorbitant empire was
unravelling precipitously, ‘foundering in mortgages and titles’.20 Philip
II’s global wars––along with inflation, plagues, and bankruptcies––were
ushering in a national decline. As a contemporary of Cervantes
lamented: ‘Never in seven hundred years of continuous war…has Spain
as a whole been as ruined and poor as it is now.’21
Cervantes must be counted among the Spaniards who understood
the perils of governing an American overseas empire. He created a
figure who embodies, as Henry Higuera puts it, ‘what is great and what
is insane about Spanish imperialism’.22 We all treasure what is great,
even saintly, about Don Quixote. Our fondness for him, however,
should not allow us to overlook certain imperial (and imperious) strains
of his mania. As early as Part One, Chapter One, he already fantasizes
himself wearing the crown ‘del imperio de Trapisonda’ [‘of the empire
of Trebizond’], a city mentioned by Marco Polo.23 And well into Part
Two, Don Quixote still dreams of becoming ‘el mayor señor del mundo’
[‘the greatest lord of the world’].24 Connected to this lordly ambition is
his wild impulsivity in acts of liberation—from peasant boys to galley
slaves to Carolingian puppets. Cervantes’s novel is a profound
exploration of human nature in an age of imperial crisis. The text of
Don Quixote manages to do what the figure of Don Quixote can scarcely
do in the text: to expose the chivalric spin that shored up a collapsing
empire, to make us laugh and cry at gallant but doomed heroics, to
suggest how normal it is to go mad in an age of iron.
Cervantes in the Americas
Although Cervantes’s knight entered into the consciousness of countless
Latin American writers, space here allows me to trace his impact on
only a handful of their responses to his writings. Rubén Darío, the
Nicaraguan poet and leader of Latin America’s Modernistas, wrote a
commemorative poem in 1905, ‘Letanía de nuestro señor Don Quijote’
[‘Litany of Our Lord Don Quixote’], begging for an intercession.25 The
Cuban Alejo Carpentier claimed that ‘Spain had no better ambassador
down the ages than Don Quixote de la Mancha’.26 For Carpentier, the
entire history of Latin America was a chronicle of the ‘the marvelous
real’.27 And that chronicle, as Edwin Williamson argues in an
indispensable essay, had ‘quixotic roots’.28 The Guatemalan writer
Miguel Angel Asturias wrote ‘Los dos quijotes’ [‘The Two Quixotes’].29
And the Mexican novelist Carlos Fuentes gave readers a long and
influential essay called Cervantes, or the Critique of Reading. These
writers may be numbered among the Latin American Magic Realists
who loudly advertise their ‘quixotic roots’.
A scholar of Colombia’s Civil Wars, Arbey Atehortúa Atehortúa, has
written instructively on the reception of Don Quixote in Colombia,
noting that Cervantes moved this nation’s novelists to explore such
themes as metafiction, false authors, found manuscripts, and
interpolated stories. In a short story titled ‘El sueño de Cide Hamete
Benengeli’ [‘The Dream of Cide Hamete Benengeli’], Colombia’s Hugo
Chaparro Valderrama pictures the captive Cervantes in his prison in
Algiers dictating Don Quixote to Cide Hamete Benengeli, who jots down
in Arabic a novel that entertains the city’s Turkish-Algerian rulers.
Experimental theatre on Cervantes has also flourished in Colombia,
with performances of Santiago García’s iconic adaptation of El Quijote
staged by the Teatro La Candelaria in Bógota and New York. Alejandro
González Puche has written and directed two enchanting meta-
theatrical adaptations of Cervantes’s works that have played as far as
China and that I have seen in Colombia: El coloquio de los perros and
Pedro de Urdemalas. Major Colombian critics include Amalia Muñoz
Iriarte, who has published a collection of essays on Don Quixote, and
María Antonia Garcés, an expert on Cervantes’s captivity with an essay
in this Handbook.
The Argentine writer Jorge Luis Borges (1899–1986) claimed to
have read an English version of Don Quixote during his boyhood,
maintaining, perhaps facetiously, that he always preferred it to the
original Spanish. One of Borges’s best-known stories is ‘Pierre Menard,
Author of Don Quijote’, the paradoxical and meta-fictional tale of an
obscure French poet who undertakes to write Don Quixote word for
word. Apart from other short fictions and essays about Cervantes and
his creations, Borges wrote poems that invoke his characters and his
landscape. Among these is ‘Un soldado de Urbina’ [‘A Soldier of
Urbina’], which pictures Don Quixote and Sancho riding across the
imagination of an impoverished and solitary old soldier, a man ‘harto
de su tierra de España’ [‘fed up with his Spanish homeland’], as Borges
elsewhere puts it.30
Following Don Quixote from South to North America, we find him
tilting at windmills as early as the 1630s in the New England colonies.
When the Mayflower passenger and pilgrim Miles Standish attacked
Thomas Morton for his sinful lifestyle—for erecting a maypole and
singing drinking songs in Merrymount—the pilgrims chopped down the
maypole, had Morton arrested, carried across the ocean, and
imprisoned. Morton compared the blows dealt him and other Puritan
‘worthies’ as akin to ‘Don Kwik-sot against the Windmill’.31 Apart from
his merry pranks, Morton was clearly a reader of Don Quixote; those
windmills were already available to him in the Thomas Shelton’s 1612
English translation.
A few generations later, Cotton Mather would appropriate the same
metaphoric windmills to vilify Roger Williams, whom he portrayed as
‘not only the first rebel against the divine-church order in the
wilderness’, but also as a man with such a furious ‘windmill’ whirling
in his head that ‘a whole country in America’ was likely ‘to be set on
fire’ for it. The portrait of Cervantes’s hero suggested here is of a crazed
and dangerous rebel against ‘the divine-church order’, which tells us
more about Cotton Mather than about Don Quixote.32
Until the publication of Uncle Tom’s Cabin in 1852, Don Quixote was
the most popular novel in the United States. Even the Founding Fathers
had read it. George Washington bought the Tobias Smollet translation
in 1787, the same day the United States Constitution was adopted. The
sixteen-year-old Benjamin Franklin wished that some ‘great genius’
would describe the actions of certain ‘Saint-errants’ just as Cervantes
had done of knights-errant in Don Quixote, whose aim was ‘to free the
World of Monsters, and to tame Gyants’.33 Unlike the majority of his
countrymen, Thomas Jefferson could read Don Quixote in the original
Spanish and encouraged his children to do the same. In an 1822 letter
to Benjamin Waterhouse, Jefferson wrote that ‘Don Quixote undertook
to redress the bodily wrongs of the world, but the re-dressment of
mental vagaries would be an enterprise more than Quixotic’.34
A generation later, Herman Melville, whose library included a well-
annotated edition of Don Quixote, embraced both the common man and
Cervantes. Chapter 26 of Moby Dick closes with a stirring apostrophe
that invokes Cervantes’s disability and his poverty: ‘O thou great
democratic God!…Thou who didst clothe with doubly hammered
leaves of finest gold, the stumped and paupered arm of Old Cervantes’.
But Melville’s theme of democratic dignity, his embrace of the common
man, and his love of Cervantes feature even more prominently in The
Piazza Tales, a parody of chivalry that both incorporates and associates
Don Quixote and the Peruvian mine of Potosí. In this fiction, Melville
creates a dejected narrator who spies a house at the top of a mountain
that glows ‘like the Potosí mine’.35 The mountain is New England’s
ordinary Mt. Greylock, but Melville’s narrator, in a fit of Carolingian
chivalry, renames it ‘Charlemagne’. En route to this radiant spot, the
narrator pointedly identifies himself with Don Quixote, ‘the sagest sage
that ever lived’, but upon arrival he discovers only the rotting cottage
of a down-and-out couple, a seamstress and her brother, a man ‘fagged
out’ from working in the local coal mines.36 The chivalric quest here is
pictured as fraudulent, not unlike the visit of Don Quixote to the Cave
of Montesinos, where Charlemagne’s Peers are discovered to be silly
and heartless, and their damsels, painted, aged, and even turbaned in
the style of their Muslim enemy. The wheel of influence comes full
circle with Melville, who reaches for Cervantes in order to return the
coal mines of Massachusetts back to the earlier silver mine of Potosí.
A cluster of other major American novelists have been influenced by
Cervantes. In Chapter 3 of Hucklelberry Finn, Mark Twain recommends
Don Quixote as a cure for ignorance. In response to an inability to see
‘elephants’, ‘A-rabs’, and other such exotica in a Sunday-school picnic,
Tom Sawyer scolds Huck Finn: ‘He said if I warn’t so ignorant, but had
read a book called Don Quixote, I would know without asking.’37 In an
interview for the Paris Review, William Faulkner claimed to have read
Don Quixote ‘every year, as some do the Bible’.38 Kathy Acker converted
Don Quixote into a female knight. And various Chicano writers—Ron
Arias in The Road to Tamazunchale and Daniel Venegas in The
Adventures of Don Chipote—have used Don Quixote as a symbolic figure
who resists Anglo-American culture.
Major North American literary critics such as Lionel Trilling and
Harold Bloom have nothing but panegyrics for Cervantes’s work. While
Trilling claims that ‘all prose fiction is a variation on the theme of Don
Quixote’,39 Bloom—in a characteristic comparison of hypercanonical
writers—considers Cervantes to be ‘the only possible peer of Dante and
Shakespeare in the Western Canon’.40 The American critic Susan Sontag
regarded Don Quixote as ‘the first and greatest epic about addiction’.41
She meant, of course, an addiction to books, specifically to the books of
chivalry that crazed Cervantes’s hero. Published during the childhood
of the printing press, these books found their way into Don Quixote’s
culture, into his library and, finally, into his brain. The first wave in the
history of mass media and the entertainment industry, books like
Amadis of Gaul and its dozen sequels were the best-sellers of the
sixteenth century. Distinguished by their courtly language and upscale
cast of characters who often came in dynasties, these books were avidly
consumed by readers who recognized their chivalric heroes as a brand.
Our advance today into the worlds of the internet—with addictions to
texting and roleplaying games—summons up a sense of déjà vu with
Don Quixote’s bibliomania.
North American scholars of Cervantes abound, although not many
have focused on his connections with the Americas. James D.
Fernández writes about Cervantes and the New World in ‘The Bonds of
Patrimony’, and in her prize-winning book Cervantes in Algiers, María
Antonia Garcés not only discusses Cervantes’s Memorial to Philip II
requesting a position in America, but also reminds us that ‘Amerindians
from Brazil and New Spain (Mexico)’ crossed the Ocean Sea to become
Algerian renegades.42 As part of a serious exploration of Cervantes’s
engagement with history, Mary Gaylord provides a series of useful
essays on his American involvements. On the topic of a new American
language, William Childers has written a chapter on ‘Chicanoizing Don
Quixote’ and another on moving ‘Toward a Canon of Spanglish
Literature’.43 Ilan Stavans has given readers a useful companion to Don
Quixote, subtitled The Novel and the World, which explains how
Cervantes’s knight has shaped the identities of countless nations, the
Americas included. A challenging section of this book—at least for
purists at the Spanish Royal Academy—celebrates the hybrid tongue of
Spanglish: Stavans is now in the process of completing Part Two of Don
Quixote in this crossbreed language, which he regards as ‘beautiful’.44
On connections between Cervantes and American film, Bruce
Burningham has established a dazzling connection between the meta-
fictional Hollywood protagonist of David Lynch’s postmodern
Mulholland Drive (2001) and the Enchanted Dulcinea of the Cave of
Montesinos.45 Barbara Simerka and Christopher B. Weimer jointly
explore the impact of Cervantes’s meta-narrativity on Charlie
Kaufman’s meta-film Adaptation.46 On the same topic of film, I would
note an essay by Nieves Romero-Díaz, rightly subtitled ‘A Quixotic
Enterprise’, which catalogues the difficulties of translating Don Quixote
to US screens.
To close on the issue of Quixotic enterprises, the earliest recorded
English usage of the term quixotic appeared in 1791. It was pressed into
service not only by Thomas Jefferson, as noted above, but also by the
nineteenth-century Harvard historian William Prescott, who lavishly
applied the term to the Spanish conquistadores, praising their ‘Quixotic
enthusiasm’ and ‘Quixotic love of adventure’.47 A rich array of
definitions of the term quixotic, across a spectrum from chivalric
idealism to delirious hallucination may be found in Howard Mancing’s
The Cervantes Encyclopedia.48 The hallucinatory meaning would seem
applicable to the US invasion of two Muslim countries not responsible
for 9/11, based on a bogus case for a preemptive war, which has
shattered the Middle East. A New York Times Op-Ed Column in 2004
alluded to President Bush’s ‘audaciously quixotic plan’ and the same
writer was still harping on it twelve years later with the claim that an
‘arrogant and delusional administration pulled the wool over
Americans’ eyes about the Iraq invasion, which has ended up costing us
trillions and killing and maiming hundreds of thousands’.49
As my epigraph on the ‘beautiful grave lunacy’ of certain American
eyes suggests, Don Quixote might be the book of the moment for US
citizens. Cervantes’s narrative may make us think twice about the
madness of reviving holy wars or expelling undesirable populations.
After Cervantes identifies himself in his Prologue as the ‘stepfather’ of
Don Quixote, nine chapters into Part I he suddenly grants the
fatherhood of our would-be Christian knight to an Arab historian called
Cide Hamete Benengeli. Pretending to find this Arab’s lost manuscript,
Cervantes then arranges for its translation by a morisco, a forcibly
converted Hispano-Muslim. By granting both the authorship of his story
and its fictional translation to a pair of moriscos, Cervantes dramatized
the complexity of racial and religious interactions of his time and place.
We are currently experiencing a repeat in history of those interactions.
Given our national ignorance of Spain’s long Muslim history and the
lunacy of our responses to the Middle East, Don Quixote may be the one
European novel that can finally de-provincialize American culture.
Works Cited
Acker, Kathy. Don Quixote: A Novel (New York: Grove Press, 1986).
Adorno, Rolena. ‘Introduction’. In Books of the Brave, by Irving Leonard
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992).
Arias, Ron. The Road to Tamazunchale: A Novel (Nevada: West Coast Poetry
Review, 1975).
Armstrong-Roche, Michael. Cervantes’s Epic Novel: Empire, Religion, and the
Dream Life of Heroes in Persiles (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2009).
Asturias, Miguel Ángel. ‘Los dos Quijotes: la locura de Fray Bartolomé’. In El
‘Quijote’ visto desde América, edited by J. Garcia Sánchez (Madrid: Visor
Libros, 2005).
Atehortúa Atehortúa, Arbey. Narrativa de las guerras civiles colombianas, 2 vols
(Bucaramanga: UIS, 2009–10).
Atehortúa Atehortúa, Arbey. ‘Recepción y Re-creación de Don Quijote de la
Mancha en Colombia [Reception and Recreation of Don Quixote of La
Mancha in Colombia]’. Paper delivered at the International Conference
‘Personajes y escenarios en Cervantes’ at Universidad los Andes, Bógota,
Colombia, 24 February 2015.
Benítez-Rojo, Antonio. Sea of Lentils, translated by James Maraniss (Amherst:
University of Massachusetts Press, 1991).
Bloom, Harold. The Western Canon (New York: Harcourt Brace, 1994).
Borges, Jorge Luis. ‘Un soldado de Urbina’. In Obra poética (Buenos Aires:
Emecé, 2001).
Brioso Santos, Héctor. Cervantes y América, in collaboration with José Montero
Reguera (Madrid: Fundación Carolina, Centro de Estudios Hispánicos e
Iberoamericanos: Marcial Pons Historia, 2006).
Burningham, Bruce R. ‘David Lynch and the Dulcineated World’. Cervantes:
Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 30, no. 2 (2010): pp. 33–56.
Canavaggio, Jean. Cervantes, translated Mauro Armiño (Madrid: Espasa–Calpe,
1986).
Carpentier, Alejo. ‘De lo real maravilloso Americano’. In Tientos y diferencias
(Montevideo: Arca, 1967).
Carpentier, Alejo. ‘No tuvo España mejor embajador, a lo largo de los siglos que
Don Quijote de la Mancha’. In Don Quijote: meditaciones hispanoamericanas,
edited by Frederick Viña (Lanham, MD: UP of America, 1988), pp. 51–7.
Cervantes, Miguel de. El ingenioso hidalgo don Quijote de la Mancha, edited by
Luis Andrés Murillo (Madrid: Clásicos Castalia, 1973).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Exemplary Novels II (Novelas ejemplares), general editor, B.
W. Ife (Warminster: Aris & Phillips Ltd., 1992).
Chang-Rodríguez, Raquel. ‘El periplo peruano de Don Quijote’. In Cervantes
and/on/in the New World, edited by Julio Vélez-Sainz and Nieves Romero-
Díaz (Newark, DE: Juan de la Cuesta Press, 2007), pp. 89–103.
Chaparro Valderrama, Hugo. ‘El sueño de Cide Hamete Benengeli’. In Autores
del Quijote, 1605–2005, edited by Sarah de Mojica and Carlos Rincón (Bógota:
Editorial Pontificia Universidad Javeriana, 2005), pp. 87–94.
Childers, William. Transnational Cervantes (Toronto: University of Toronto Press,
2006).
Clamurro, William. Cervantes’s Novelas Ejemplares: Reading their Lessons from
His Time to Ours (Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2015).
Corréa-Díaz, Luis. Cervantes y América/Cervantes en las Américas: Mapa de
campo y ensayo de bibliografía razonada (Barcelona: Edition Reichenberger,
2006).
Corréa-Díaz, Luis. Una Historia Apócrifa de América: El Arte de La Conjetura de
Pedro Gómez Valderrama (Medellín: Coleccion Krenes, 2003).
Dowd, Maureen. New York Times, 15 January 2004 and 22 February 2016.
Elliott, J. H. Spain and its World: 1500–1700 (New Haven: Yale University Press,
1989).
Faulkner, William. Interview by Jean Stein in the Paris Review, no. 12 (Spring
1956).
Fernández, James D. ‘The Bonds of Patrimony: Cervantes and the New World’.
PMLA 109, no. 5 (1994): pp. 969–81.
Finch, Patricia and John J. Allen. ‘Don Quijote across the Centuries’. In Don
Quijote: Miguel de Cervantes, translated by Burton Raffel and edited by Diana
de Armas Wilson (New York: W. W. Norton, 1999), pp. 767–74.
Fuentes, Carlos. Don Quixote, or the Critique of Reading (Austin: University of
Texas Press, 1976).
Garcés, María Antonia. Cervantes in Algiers: A Captive’s Tale (Nashville:
Vanderbilt University Press, 2002).
Gaylord. Mary M. ‘Don Quijote y los héroes americanos de la palabra’. In El
Quijote desde América, edited by Gustavo Illades and James Iffland (Puebla:
Benemérita Universidad Autónoma de Puebla-El Colegio de México, 2006),
pp. 81–100.
Gaylord, Mary M. ‘Don Quixote’s New World of Language’. Cervantes: Bulletin of
the Cervantes Society of America 27, no. 1 (2007): pp. 71–94.
Gaylord, Mary M. ‘The True History of Early Modern Writing in Spanish: Some
American Reflections’. Modern Language Quarterly 57, no. 2 (1996): pp. 213–
25.
Gómez Valderrama, Pedro. ‘En un lugar de las Indias’. Cuentos completos
(Bógota: Alfaguara, 1996), pp. 93–8.
González Puche, Alejandro. Pedro de Urdemalas, la aventura experimental del
teatro cervantino (Vigo: Academia del Hispanismo, 2012).
Higuera, Henry. Eros and Empire: Politics and Christianity in ‘Don Quixote’
(Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 1995).
Illades, Gustavo and James Iffland (eds). El Quijote desde América (Puebla:
Benemérita Universidad Autónoma de Puebla–El Colegio de México, 2006).
Iriarte, Amalia Muñoz, editor. Don Quijote en las aulas (Bógota: Siglo de Hombre
Editores, 2006).
Jefferson, Thomas. The Writings of Thomas Jefferson, edited by Andrew H.
Lipscomb, and Albert E. Bergh, 20 vols. (Washington, D.C.: Thomas Jefferson
Memorial 
Association 
of 
the 
United 
States, 
1903–4). 
https://
www.monticello.org/site/research-and…/don-quixote-novel.
Kagan, Richard L. ‘Prescott’s Paradigm: American Historical Scholarship and the
Decline of Spain’. American Historical Review 101/2 (1996): pp. 423–46.
Kamen, Henry. Empire: How Spain Became a World Power, 1492–763 (New York:
HarperCollins, 2003).
Leonard, Irving A. Books of the Brave (Berkeley: University of California Press,
1992).
López de Gómara, Francisco. Historia general de las Indias y vida de Hernán
Cortés. Prólogo y Cronología por Jorge Gurría Lacroix, vol. 64 (Caracas:
Biblioteca Ayacucho, 1979).
López Martínez, Héctor. El Quijote en América [electronic resource], edited by
Friedhelm Schmidt-Welle and Ingrid Simson (Amsterdam & New York:
Rodopi, 2010).
Mancing, Howard. The Cervantes Encyclopedia, 2 vols (London: Greenwood
Press, 2004).
Mather, Cotton. The Heath Anthology of American Literature, vol. I (Toronto: D. C.
Heath and Co., 1990).
Melville, Herman. The Piazza Tales, edited by Harrison Hayford et al., vol. 9
(Evanston, IL: Northwestern-Newberry, 1987).
Miró Quesada Sosa, Aurelio. Lope de Vega y el Perú; Cervantes, Tirso y el Perú; El
primer virrey-poeta en América (Lima: Sucesión Aurelio Miró Quesada Sosa,
2001).
Morton, Thomas. The Heath Anthology of American Literature, vol. 1 (Toronto: D.
C. Heath and Co., 1990).
Pagden, Anthony. Lords of all the World: Ideologies of Empire in Spain, Britain and
France c. 1500–c. 1800 (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1995).
Parton, James. Life and Times of Benjamin Franklin, vol. 1 (New York: Mason
Bros., 1864).
Polo, Marco. The Travels of Marco Polo, edited by Manuel Komroff and
translated by William Marsden (New York: The Modern Library, 2001).
Porras Barrenechea, Raúl. ‘Cervantes y el Perú’. Arbor 9 (1945): pp. 537–44.
Porras Barrenechea, Raúl. El Inca Garcilaso en Montilla (1561–1614) (Lima:
Editorial San Marcos, 1955).
Romero-Díaz, Nieves. ‘Conclusion: Cervantes, Don Quixote, and the New World:
Endless Adventures’. In Cervantes and/on/in the New World, edited by Julio
Vélez-Sainz and Romero-Díaz (Newark, DE: Juan de la Cuesta Press, 2007),
pp. 307–21.
Romero-Díaz, Nieves. ‘Translating Cervantes and Don Quixote for the US
Screens: A Quixotic Enterprise’. In Cervantes and/on/in the New World, edited
by Julio Vélez-Sainz and Romero-Díaz (Newark, DE: Juan de la Cuesta Press,
2007), pp. 213–30.
Santa, Eduardo. Don Quijote por los caminos de América: edición conmemorativa
del IV centenario del Ingenioso Hidalgo Don Quijote de La Mancha (Bogotá:
Editorial El Buho, 2005).
Simerka, Barbara and Christopher B. Weimer. ‘Duplicitous Diegesis: Don Quijote
and Charlie Kaufman’s Adaptation’. Hispania 88, no. 1 (2005): pp. 91–100.
Sontag, Susan. The Boston Globe, Book Section (9 March 1986).
Stavans, Ilan. Quixote: The Novel and the World (New York: W.W. Norton,
2015).
Trilling, Lionel. The Liberal Imagination (New York: Viking, 1950).
Twain, Mark. Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, edited by Thomas Cooley (New
York: W. W. Norton, 1999).
Vélez-Sainz, Julio and Nieves Romero–Díaz (eds). Cervantes and/on/in the New
World (Newark, DE: Juan de la Cuesta Press, 2007).
Venegas, Daniel. Las aventuras de Don Chipote (Houston: Arte Público Press,
1999).
Williamson, Edwin. ‘The Quixotic Roots of Magic Realism. History and Fiction
from Alejo Carpentier to Gabriel García Márquez’. In Cervantes and the
Modernists: The Question of Influence, edited by Williamson (London: Tamesis,
1994).
Wilson, Diana de Armas. Allegories of Love: Cervantes’s Persiles and Sigismunda
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1991).
Wilson, Diana de Armas. Cervantes, the Novel, and the New World (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2000).
1 Petition found in the Archivo de Indias Patronato 253 R.1/1/5. Dated 21
May 1590, the petition displays a marginal response by a Doctor Núñez
Morquecho. Apart from the available Cartagena position, the other three were
for the comptroller of the New Kingdom of Granada, the governor of Soconusco
in Guatemala, and the magistrate of the city of La Paz in present-day Bolivia
(Canavaggio, p. 199).
2 Canavaggio, pp. 313 and 156.
3 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, p. 50.
4 All quotations from Spanish have been translated by the author of this
chapter unless otherwise noted.
5 Romero-Díaz, ‘Conclusion…’, p. 307.
6 Leonard, pp. 270–312.
7 Adorno, p. xviii.
8 Chang-Rodríguez, pp. 89–103.
9 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, II.40.
10 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, II.71.
11 Clamurro, p. 30.
12 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, II.8; see Chapter 42 of López de Gómara, who
gave the age an account of Cortés’s negotiations with men who would secretly
scuttle his ships.
13 Cervantes, Exemplary Novels II, p. 68.
14 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, II.10.
15 Porras Barrenechea, El Inca Garcilaso…, p. 238.
16 Wilson, Allegories of Love, 109–29.
17 Armstrong-Roche, pp. 49–50.
18 Kamen, pp. xxiii–xxviii.
19 Elliott, p. 264.
20 Benítez-Rojo, p. 15.
21 The lament about Spain’s poverty is by Luis Valle de la Cerda, cited by
Elliott, p. 264.
22 Higuera, pp. 1–2.
23 Polo, Travels of…, p. 17.
24 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, II.39; see Pagden.
25 Cited by Stavans, pp. 96–7.
26 Carpentier, ‘No tuvo España…’, pp. 51–7.
27 Carpentier, ‘De lo real…’, pp. 96–112.
28 Williamson, pp. 103–20.
29 Asturias, pp. 197–9.
30 Borges, ‘Un soldado de Urbina’, p. 199.
31 Morton, p. 186–7.
32 Mather, p. 232.
33 Franklin, cited in Parton, p. 67.
34 Jefferson, n.p.
35 Melville, pp. 3–5.
36 Melville, pp. 6 and 9.
37 Twain, p. 25.
38 Faulkner, n.p.
39 Trilling, p. 203.
40 Bloom, p. 127.
41 Sontag, n.p.
42 Garcés, pp. 196–7 and p. 35.
43 Childers, pp. 194–242.
44 Stavans, pp. 201–4.
45 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, II.23.
46 Simerka and Weimer, pp. 91–100.
47 Kagan, p. 444.
48 Mancing, v. II, p. 598.
49 Dowd, n.p.
Section 7
Reception
Chapter 28
Cervantes’s Biographers
Krzysztof Sliwa
Universidad del Atlántico, Barranquilla, Colombia
Translated by
Aaron M. Kahn
The objective of this chapter is to present the major scholarly
contributions to the development of a clear profile of Cervantes the
man, from the first biography by Mayáns to present times. My goal is to
analyse and meticulously compare all the major biographies in order to
determine the vision obtained by the biographers of the hero of
Lepanto and to study the development of knowledge in relation to
Cervantes’s life and academic ideologies concerning his works. It is
worth emphasizing that in my discussion of each biographer, I have
tried not to repeat information already examined in the previous one.
The principle reasons for this study are the following:
1. No one until now has examined the scholarly contributions,
which are undoubtedly important, to the development of a
narrative of Cervantes’s life.
2. Biographies of Cervantes are the only resources in which we
can find the trajectory of his life, despite some contradictory
information.
3. These scholarly studies each prompt special interest and they
deserve admiration for their content, their discoveries, and their
different concepts and criteria for presenting the life of the hero
of Algiers.
4. Each new biography, despite recounting information, provides
new discoveries that shed light on the life of Cervantes.
5. Cervantine scholars are still in search for a definitive
biography of the author of Don Quixote.
An analysis of this kind is necessary owing to the numerous
publications about the life of Cervantes based on legends, fantasies,
false documents, poorly or partially interpreted Cervantine works, and
various other errors. The biographers will be studied in chronological
order. These biographies are considered scholarly works, recognized
globally for their reliable content about Cervantes’s life, and based
above all on the discovery and scrutinized study of documentation.
Each one of the nine biographers studied here represents the next phase
in establishing a vision of Cervantes’s life.
Gregorio Mayáns y Siscar
Gregorio Mayáns y Siscar, Valencian polygraph, writer, and Spanish
scholar, was born on 9 May 1699 in Oliva (Valencia). He was baptized
in the parish of Santa María. In 1706 he studied Latin grammar in the
Colegio de Coredelles, governed by the Jesuits in Barcelona. In July of
1713, he was in Oliva and by the end of this year he was a student of
Philosophy in Valencia, finishing his studies in March of 1716. In 1713
he began studying Law, concentrating on the legal doctrine of Arnold
Vinnen. In October of 1719 he began studying Jurisprudence at the
University of Salamanca, and on 22 June 1722 he returned to Oliva. On
21 November he received his doctorate from the University of Valencia,
and on 1 July 1723 he became a professor of Law (1722–33). On 6
October 1733 he became royal librarian in Madrid, where he found the
manuscripts of Nicolás Antonio on 5 December of that year. In 1737 he
published the first biography of Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra, and two
years later he returned to his village of birth, where he dedicated
himself to scholarship. On 28 February 1740 he contracted marriage
with Margarita Pascual. In 1754 he was named an honorary member of
the Academica Latina de Jena, for which he wrote. In 1757 he
published Retórica (Valencia) and at the end of 1766 he visited court
with the objective of being named Alcalde Honorario de Casa y Corte.
His scholarly works were published in the Netherlands, Germany,
Portugal, Spain, and Switzerland. In some of his writings he used the
pseudonym Don Plácido Veranio.
Mayáns died on 21 December 1781. For his tireless literary activity,
scrupulousness, and love for accuracy, he is one of the writers who best
represents scholarship and the critical spirit characteristic of the
eighteenth century. He communicated with many Spanish and foreign
scholars. His abundant correspondence in Latin and in Spanish,
dispersed and largely unpublished, frequently addresses historical and
literary themes. He published Orígenes de la lengua española (Madrid,
1737), which consists of two volumes; the first is composed of a long
discourse by Mayáns about the corruption of the Latin language in
Spain, and the way in which the Spanish language took form. The
second volume is a collection of various beautiful tracts among which
figures, published for the first time, the Diálogo de la lengua (Madrid,
1737) by Juan de Valdés. His ‘Latin Letters’ were much celebrated in
Europe. His Retórica is the definitive study and anthology of Castilian
prose in the eighteenth century. He also published Idea de la Academia
valenciana (Valencia, 1742); Obras y traducciones poéticas de fray Luis de
León, with his life (Valencia, 1761), and Gramática de la lengua latina en
cinco libros (Valencia, 1768–70).
Mayáns also traversed the notes made by Nicolás Antonio to form
his Bibliotheca hispana nova, sive hispanorum scriptorum qui ab anno MD.
ad MDCLXXXIV floruere notitia. (Matriti, 1788). Mestre believes that the
biographer, before receiving ‘the first letter from Hordeñana, already
possessed a copy of Cervantes’s baptismal certificate and even more
obtained news about the marriage of the author of the Quixote in
Esquivias’.1 Mayáns’s Vida de Cervantes ‘contrasts with later studies.
Vicente de los Ríos, Juan Antonio Pellicer, and, above all, Fernández de
Navarrete, who’s Life came long after Mayáns’s death and clearly
belongs in the nineteenth century cede more importance to the original
documents related to the family and to concrete circumstances in the
life of the Manco de Lepanto. Only the search for original documents
constituted, in those times, the means to advance the biography of
Cervantes’.2
Gregorio Mayáns y Siscar contributed the following work on Miguel
de Cervantes Saavedra:
Mayáns y Siscar, Gregorio. Vida de Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra
(Madrid, 1737).
The sources for the biography of Miguel de Cervantes by Gregorio
Mayáns y Siscar were the following:
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. La Galatea (Madrid, 1736).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Novela del cautivo en Primera y
Segunda parte del ingenioso hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha (Madrid,
1662).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Novelas ejemplares (Madrid, 1664).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Ocho comedias y ocho entremeses
(Madrid, 1615).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Los Trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda
(Madrid, 1625).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Viaje del Parnaso y La Adjunta
(Madrid, 1614).
Espinel, Vicente. Diversas rimas (Madrid, 1591).
Vicente de los Ríos
Vicente de los Ríos was born on 8 February 1736 in Córdoba and died
on 2 June 1779 in Madrid. He began his military career in the
Regimiento de Dragones de Villaviciosa on 30 August 1757, and on 22
July 1760 he was promoted to under lieutenant of the Royal Corp of
Artillery, where he continued serving as captain with the rank of
lieutenant colonel. He was a teacher of military sciences at the Segovia
School, and during the war with Portugal, he was present at the siege
and conquest of Almeida (1762). He was raised to a knighthood in the
Order of Santiago on 20 February 1779, named an honorary individual
of the Real Academia Española on 12 January 1773, supernumerary
member on 11 March of the same year and an honorary member on 17
September 1777. He belonged as well to the Academia de la Historia
and to the Academia de Buenas Letras in Seville. His first literary work
was Elogio histórico de Cervantes [Historical Praise of Cervantes], with an
analysis or critical judgment of his works. He had already concluded
this work when he joined the Academia Española, where in March of
1773 he gave a reading of it that received applause from the
Corporation, and he had the idea of undertaking a correct and opulent
edition of Don Quixote. The Academia applied for and obtained the
correct license to do this edition; but because they deemed it better to
have a new Vida de Cervantes and an analytical approach to his works,
the Academia expressed their preference for Ríos to continue his
studies in this manner and not in the form of an elegy. He complied,
improving his previous studies and proposing the title Memorias de la
vida y escritos de Cervantes [Memories of the life and Writings of
Cervantes], in three parts. The first part was a biographical account, the
second a critical study of Cervantes’s works, and the third consisted of
all the documentation that supported the facts referred to in his life.
With this plan, he rewrote the first part that he read to the Academia
on 21 March 1776, and the following year he presented various
observations and notes about Cervantes’s lineage, which should have
then been incorporated into the third part of his study. Unfortunately,
death surprised him before he could see the first part of his work
published in the Academia’s edition of the Quixote and leaving the
second part unfinished. In addition to this study, he wrote Discurso
sobre los ilustres autores e inventores de Artillería que han florecido en
España (Madrid, 1767); Discurso para la apertura de la Escuela de Táctica
de Artillería, dicho en el Real Colegio de Segovia (Madrid, 1773); and
Discurso sobre la necesidad de la Táctica de Artillería (Madrid, 1888). His
name appears in the ‘Catálogo de Autorida des de la Lengua de la
Academia’ [‘Catalogue of Authorities of the Language Academy’]
included in the Diccionario de autoridades (the original title being
Diccionario de la lengua castellana (1726)).3
Vicente de los Ríos contributed the following work about Miguel de
Cervantes Saavedra:
Ríos, Vicente de los. ‘Vida de Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra’, ‘Análisis
del Quijote,’ y ‘Plan cronológico del Quijote’. In El ingenioso hidalgo Don
Quijote de la Mancha, by Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra (Madrid: Real
Academia Española, 1780), pp. iii–xlii; xliii–clii; cliii–clxiv.
Juan Antonio Pellicer y Pilares
Juan Antonio Pellicer y Pilares4, Spanish scholar, was born in
Encinacorba (Zaragoza) in 1739 and he died in Madrid in 1806. He
went to Madrid as a very young child where he studied Latin,
Philosophy, Religion, and Canon Law at the University of Alcalá de
Henares. In 1762 he was admitted to the Biblioteca de Palacio, the
library of the Royal Palace, spending many years on the Adiciones y
correcciones [Additions and Corrections] of the Biblioteca Hispana by
Nicolás Antonio. He was named professor of History, performing the
role of librarian. He published his acclaimed Ensayo de una biblioteca de
traductores españoles, donde se da noticia de las traducciones que hay en
castellano de las Sagradas Escrituras, Santos Padres, filósofos, etc. [Survey
of a Library of Spanish Translators, where can be found Translations that
Exist in Spanish of the Holy Scriptures, Holy Fathers, Philosophers, etc.]
(1778). He proved himself as a Cervantes specialist with his edition of
Don Quijote de la Mancha (1797), with new notes, analyses, and a
documented Vida de Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra (1797).
This biography was amplified by ‘Documentos que acreditan algunos
sucesos descubiertos nuevamente de la vida de Miguel de Cervantes
Saavedra’ [‘Documents that confirm certain events recently discovered
about the life of Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra’]. Also supporting this
study was a letter in Spanish with a postscript in many multiple
languages in which Don Juan Antonio Pellicer and Don Josef Antonio
Conde, individuals in the Royal Library of His Majesty, respond to the
critical letter that an anonymous writer directed to the author of the
Notas del Don Quijote, condemning some of its findings (1800). The
edition of Don Quixote with notes had been very highly regarded and
Pellicer was the first one to establish the place and date of Cervantes’s
birth through the discovery of his baptismal records, dated Alcalá de
Henares on 9 October 1547.
Juan Antonio Pellicer y Pilares wrote and participated in the
publication of the following works on Cervantes:
Pellicer y Pilares, Juan Antonio. ‘Notas críticas y curiosas’. In El
ingenioso hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha, by Miguel de Cervantes
Saavedra (México, 1833).
Pellicer y Pilares, Juan Antonio. ‘Una noticia biográfica de
Cervantes’. In The Life and Exploits of the Ingenious Gentleman Don
Quijote de la Mancha (London, 1809).
Pellicer y Pilares, Juan Antonio. Examen crítico del tomo primero de El
anti–Quixote (Madrid, 1806).
Pellicer y Pilares, Juan Antonio. ‘Carta en castellano pon posdata
políglota’. In Ingenioso hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha (Madrid,
1800).
Pellicer y Pilares, Juan Antonio. Discurso preliminar al Don Quixote
(Madrid, 1797).
Pellicer y Pilares, Juan Antonio. Ensayo de una biblioteca de
traductores españoles (Madrid, 1778).
Martín Fernández de Navarrete
Martín Fernández de Navarrete, Spanish sailor, hydrographer, writer,
and learned historian, was born on 9 November 1765 in Ávalos,
Logroño, in Calahorra. In 1780 he joined the navy and participated in
the siege of Gibraltar of 1782. From 1780 to 1808 he took part in
different actions and campaigns, among them the taking of Tolón and
the blockade of the French fleet in the Bay of Rosas. After a period in
Madrid, where he frequented learned societies, he was destined for
Cartagena in 1784, and there he began to publish works of little merit.
He dedicated himself to the study of sublimate mathematics with
applications to astronomy, navigation, military manoeuvres, and naval
architecture. In 1787 he was named a royal ensign. In 1789 he was
promoted to a frigate lieutenant, and he was put in charge of reading
through various archives to find notes and manuscripts referring to the
navy for the maritime museum in Cádiz. On this occasion, he
discovered the accounts of Christopher Columbus’s first and third
voyages written in the hand of Bartolomé de las Casas. In 1792, he
became a member of the Real Academia Española, and a few days later
of the Real Academia de Bellas Artes de San Fernando. Upon war being
declared with Revolutionary France, he requested a return to active
service and fought in numerous campaigns between 1793 and 1796,
the year in which he returned to Madrid as a civil servant of the
Ministry of the Navy. In 1800, he was named an academic of history. In
1803, he was promoted to senior official of the Secretariat, and in 1807
he was named chief finance minister of the Supreme Court of
Almirantazgo. On the French invasion of Spain, Napoleón named
Fernández de Navarrete a state advisor and superintendent of the Navy,
posts that he renounced and he retired to a private life, staying in
Madrid until 1812. Afterwards, he was named secretary of the Real
Academia de Bellas Artes in 1815 and president of the Academia de
Historia in 1824, a post from which he pushed for the publication of
the Colección de documentos inéditos [Collection of Unpublished
Documents]. At the Real Academia, of which he was librarian from
1816, he worked on an updated Ortografía, and he published a
magnificent version of the Quixote, extended with the most complete
biography of Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra written at that time.
Martín Fernández de Navarrete wrote and participated in the
following publications about Cervantes:
Fernández de Navarrete, Martín. ‘Bosquejo histórico sobre la novela
española’. Biblioteca de autores españoles 33 (1914): pp. 5–100.
Fernández de Navarrete, Martín. El ingenioso hidalgo Don Quijote de
la Mancha (Barcelona, 1832–4).
Fernández de Navarrete, Martín. Notas cervantinas (Barcelona: Casa
Provincial de Caridad, 1943).
Fernández de Navarrete, Martín. Novelas posteriores a Cervantes. Con
un estudio de las obras en prosa de Cervantes (Madrid, 1871).
Jerónimo Morán
Jerónimo Morán5 was born on 11 March 1817 in Valladolid, and he
died on 21 December 1872 in Madrid. He was a romantic poet, founder
and director of the newspaper La Guirnalda (Madrid, 1867), and he had
a reasonably long and prosperous life. He collaborated on El Teatro
(Madrid, 1864), Flor de la Infancia (Madrid, 1868), and other
publications. He held some posts in the War Department and in the Tax
Office, the position of officer of the Biblioteca Nacional, and an official
in the Ministry of Development. Morán wrote numerous poems, a
Historia de las órdenes de caballería [History of Chivalric Orders], and a
Vida de Miguel de Cervantes [Life of Miguel de Cervantes] (Madrid, 1863).
He was the first to publish ‘La epístola a Mateo Vázquez’ [‘Letter to
Mateo Vázquez’], on 3 May 1863 in Museo universal. He composed
various dramatic works and a comedy, as well as being the author of a
book of moral maxims in verse entitled Doctrina de Salomón [Salomon’s
Doctrine] (Valladolid, 1849).
James Fitzmaurice-Kelly
James Fitzmaurice-Kelly6 was born on 20 June 1857 in Glasgow and he
died on 30 November 1923 in Sydenham, London. He was a man of
letters, a Hispanist, a teacher, and a scholar. From a young age, he
dedicated himself to the study of Spanish history and literature,
contributing with his works to making known in the English-speaking
world everything referring to Spain; he was even invited on various
occasions to the United States to teach special courses at different
universities. At his death, he held the Cervantes chair, created for him
at the University of London. In 1909, he was named professor of
Spanish language and literature at the University of Liverpool, moving
in 1916 to the University of London to work in the same capacity.
Amongst his achievements, he served successively as correspondent of
the Royal Academy of Language (1895), the Royal Academy of History
(1912), and the Royal Academy of Buenas Letras in Barcelona, and the
Royal Academy of Science in Lisbon (1922). He was also the member of
a good number of Hispanist organizations in the UK and North
America, and he was a knight commander in the Order of Alfonso XII.
He held chairs at Oxford and Cambridge and was a professor at Kings
College London and Liverpool.
He published numerous works about the Spanish language and
literature in which he passionately demonstrates his love for Spain
through scholarly study, and all the works are the product of deep,
patient studies and a great enthusiasm that he maintained until his
final days. His most highly acclaimed work was his Historia de la
literatura española [History of Spanish Literature] (Madrid, 1898),
accompanied by a select bibliography. It had various editions printed in
Spanish, French, and English. He dedicated a great part of his research
to the life of Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra, writing a biography
entitled Vida de Cervantes (London, 1892), and he published Spanish
anthologies, an edition of Garcilaso’s poetry, a book on Fray Luis de
León (Oxford, 1921), the Oxford Book of Spanish Literature (Oxford,
1913), a book on Góngora (Oxford, 1918), the Cambridge Readings in
Spanish Literature (Cambridge, 1920), a study entitled Lope de Vega and
Spanish Drama (Glasgow, 1902), and works about other classical and
modern writers. He contributed to the Homenaje a Menéndez Pelayo,
collaborated on the eleventh edition of the Encyclopædia Britannica, and
on the Cambridge Modern History. Finally, he directed the section on
Romance languages for the Modern Review.
James Fitzmaurice-Kelly wrote and published the following works
about Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra:
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James. ‘An Alleged 1604 Edition of Don Quixote’.
Athenaeum 638 (1897): pp. 99–100.
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James. ‘Artículo bibliográfico’. Revista crítica de
historia y literatura españolas, portuguesas e hispano-americanas
(1897): pp. 201–4.
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James. ‘Cervantes’. The Year Book of Modern
Languages (Cambridge University Press, 1920): pp. 139–50.
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James. ‘Cervantes and Shakespeare’. British
Academy Proceedings 6 (1915–16): pp. 297–317.
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James. ‘Cervantes in England’. British Academy
Proceedings 2 (1905–6): pp. 11–29. Rev. by H. Oelsner. Modern
Language Review 1 (1905–6): pp. 258–59.
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James. The Complete Works of Miguel de Cervantes
Saavedra. Edited by James Fitzmaurice-Kelly. Translated by John
Ormsby (Glasgow: Gowans & Gray, 1901–3). Rev. by A. M.–F.
Bulletin Hispanique 3 (1901): pp. 425–6; Rev. by H. A. Rennert.
Modern Language Notes 17 (1902): pp. 178, 180–1.
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James. Don Quixote. Edited by James Fitzmaurice-
Kelly (Glasgow: Gowans & Gray, 1901).
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James.’Don Quixote in Gujarati and Japanese’.
Revue Hispanique 7 (1900): pp. 510–11.
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James. Don Quixote, by Miguel de Cervantes
Saavedra. Translated by Charles Jervas, with notes and an
introduction by Fitzmaurice-Kelly (London–New York–Toronto:
Henry Frowde, [1909]): p. 291
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James. Don Quixote, by Miguel de Cervantes
Saavedra. Edited with notes and an introduction by Fitzmaurice-
Kelly (London & New York: Henry Frowde, 1907).
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James. Historia de la literatura española (Madrid:
Librería de Suárez, 1921): pp. 203–20.
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James. The History of Don Quijote of la Mancha.
Revue Hispanique 3 (1896): pp. 353–5.
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James. El ingenioso hidalgo don Quixote de la
Mancha, de Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra. Primera edición del texto
restituido, con notas y una introducción por Jaime Fitzmaurice-Kelly
y Juan Ormsby (London–Edinburgh, 1898–9). Rev. by H. A. Rennert.
Modern Language Notes 15 (1900): pp. 422–6; Rev. by R. Foulché–
Delbosc. Revue Hispanique 7 (1900): pp. 546–50.
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James. The Ingenious Gentleman Don Quijote of la
Mancha, by Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra. Revue Hispanique
(London, 1895): pp. 353–9.
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James. ‘The Life of Cervantes. The Works of
Cervantes’. Chapters on Spanish Literature (London: Archibald
Constable and Company, 1908): pp. 120–62.
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James. ‘Introduction’. The Exemplary Novels
(Glasgow: Gowans & Gray, 1902): pp. vii–xiv.
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James. Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra; biografía
(Santiago 
de 
Chile: 
Imprenta, 
Litografía 
y 
Encuadernación
Barcelona, 1915). Rev. by M. T. Wyzewa. Revue de deux mondes 20
(1914): pp. 457–68; Athenaeum 4498 (1914): p. 58; Rev. by A. Ámel.
Literaturblatt für germanische und romanische Philologie 36 (1915): pp.
229–30; Rev. by E. O. Mercurio (July 12, 1915). Anales de la
Universidad de Chile 134 (1914): pp. 885–918; 135 (1914): pp. 21–
96; 136 (1915): pp. 59–128, 395–439.
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James. Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra. A Memoir
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1913). Rev. by H. A. Rennert Modern
Language Review 9 (1914): pp. 421–3; Rev. by G. T. Northup. Modern
Language Notes 29 (1914): pp. 145–8; Rev. by J. D. Fitz–Gerald.
Romanic Review 5 (1914): p. 391.
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James. ‘Notes sur la bibliographie française de
Cervantes’. Reuve Hispanique 1 (1894): pp. 336–7.
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James. ‘Phantasio–Cratuminos sive Homo Vitreus,
by Caspar Ens. Reissued with a note on El licenciado Vidriera’. Revue
Hispanique 4 (1897): pp. 45–70.
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James. ‘A Roumanian Translation of Don Quijote’.
Revue Hispanique 6 (1899): pp. 203–4.
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James. Spanish Bibliography (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1925).
Luis Astrana Marín
Luis Astrana Marín was born in Villaescusa de Haro (Cuenca) on 5
August 1889 and he died in Madrid in 1959. When he was a child he
already showed signs of his extraordinary literary abilities, writing
poetry and stories with great ease. He soon began his studies in the
Colegio de Franciscanos Descalzos in Belmonte, where he completed his
schooling, specializing in Latin, which he translated with great skill
when he was barely eleven years old. In 1906 he began at the Seminary
of Cuenca to pursue a career as a priest and studied philosophy,
theology, and various other subjects, especially languages; he perfected
and expanded his knowledge of Latin, while learning Greek, Italian,
French, and English, simultaneously pursuing music and other
disciplines. After 1909 he embarked on a long journey covering many
parts of Europe (Italy, France, the United Kingdom, and Portugal) and
upon his return in 1911 he settled definitely in Madrid. Luis Astrana
Marín was a man of letters, a journalist, a translator, and a dedicated
scholar of literature. He developed a fruitful career as a journalist and
he wrote novels and theatrical works. He was the first person to
translate the complete works of Shakespeare, with many saying that
among Spanish people he knows the works of Shakespeare the best. His
critical output is considerable, including Obras completas de Quevedo
(Madrid, 1934), his Vida inmortal de William Shakespeare (Madrid, 1930
and 1940), and his annotated editions of the works of the great English
playwright. We are indebted to him as well for his Vida azarosa de Lope
de Vega (Barcelona, 1935), Vida turbulenta de Quevedo (Madrid, 1945),
Ensayos, Cristóbal Colón, su patria, sus restos y el enigma del
descubrimiento de América (Madrid, 1929), Obras completos de William
Shakespeare (Madrid, 1941), Una visita de la reina Mab. Novela corta
(Madrid, 1923). Las obras teatrales son Gitanos y Luz de playa (Madrid,
1926). Finally, we have Obras completas de William Shakespeare
(Madrid, 1930); Sonetos de Shakespeare (Madrid, 1944), Epistolario
completo de D. Francisco de Quevedo y Villegas (Madrid, 1946), and Vida
genial y trágica de Séneca (Madrid, 1947). Furthermore, he left us with
an incomplete biography of Fray Luis de León and his articles appeared
in mainstream newspapers, such as El liberal, La mañana, La
correspondencia de España, and El Heraldo de Madrid. Astrana Marín is of
the most original of writers, journalists, scholars, and critics.
Luis Astrana Marín wrote and contributed to the following
publications on the life and works of Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra:
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘El Ángel que conoció Cervantes’. Finisterre
(1948): pp. 291–309.
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘La carta del autor de La Galatea. Cervantes
quería irse a América’. ABC (3 de noviembre de 1954).
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘Una carta inédita de Cervantes’. ABC (21 de
octubre de 1954).
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘El IV Centenario de Cervantes’. La Prensa (12
de agosto de 1941).
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘Cervantes en la Palma del Condado.
Documentos inéditos’. ABC (29 de enero de 1952).
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘Cervantes y Shakespeare’. Lecturas dominicales
(24 de junio de 1934).
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘Cervantina’. La Prensa (6 de agosto de 1945).
Astrana Marín, Luis. Cervantinas, y otros ensayos (Madrid: Afrodísio
Aguado, 1944).
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘Cómo se hizo el Quijote y dinero que Cervantes
ganó con él’. ABC (23 de abril de 1954).
Astrana Marín, Luis. El cortejo de Minerva. [Cervantes] (Madrid:
Espasa–Calpe, [1930]).
Astrana Marín, Luis. Don Quijote de la Mancha (Madrid: Editorial
Castilla, 1947).
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘Fecha verdadera del fallecimiento de
Cervantes’. Diario de Barcelona (23 de abril de 1954).
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘La Ínsula Barataria y las relaciones de
Cervantes con Zaragoza’. Zaragoza 3 (1956): pp. 125–42.
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘Los libros y manuscritos de Cervantes,
¿pasaron a su cuñado, Fray Antonio de Salazar? A la villa de
Pastrana habrán de dirigirse las investigaciones, según un
documento cervantino hasta ahora inédito? Ya (23 de abril de
1957).
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘La madre de Cervantes’. Diario de la marina (21
de julio de 1946).
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘La madre de Cervantes’. El Sol (9 de octubre de
1947).
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘Las mujeres en la vida de Cervantes’. ABC (23
de abril de 1957).
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘Nuevos documentos cervantinos en Carmona’.
ABC (23 de febrero de 1952).
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘Nuevos documentos inéditos cervantinos. El
códice de San Andrés, la familia Villafranca y la amante de Miguel
de Cervantes’. ABC (January 29, 1960).
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘La primera biografía de Cervantes’. Diario de
Yucatán (18 de mayo de 1947); Revista javeriana 27 (1947): pp. 262–
64.
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘La primera traducción impresa del autor del
Quijote [Le curieux impertinent]’. ABC (23 de abril de 1955).
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘Queda identificada la antigua y lóbrega posada
de Cervantes’. Ya (23 de abril de 1958).
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘Quién fue el Caballero del Verde Gabán,
hidalgo de cruz y aldea’. La Nación (1 de noviembre de 1947).
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘Los Ricotes de Esquivias y el tendero morisco
del Quijote. Diario de Barcelona (20 de agosto de 1949).
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘Supercherías y errores cervantinos’. ABC (23 de
abril de 1948); Diario de Yucatán (9 de mayo de 1948).
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘En el CCCXXXVI aniversario de la muerte de
Cervantes Don Quijote, fraile agustino’. ABC (23 de abril de 1952).
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘En el CCCXXXVI aniversario de la muerte de
Cervantes Nicolás de Ovando, fraile Benito’. Diario de Barcelona (23
de abril de 1952).
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘En el CCCXXXIX aniversario de la muerte de
Cervantes; La primera traducción impresa del autor del Quijote’. ABC
(23 de abril de 1955).
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘En el CCCXL aniversario de la muerte del autor
del Quijote. Una carta inédita de Cervantes’. ABC (3 de noviembre de
1954; 21 de abril de 1956).
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘En el CCCXL aniversario de la muerte de
Cervantes; Imitaciones extranjeras del Quijote. El Caballero de la
Ardiente Mano de Almirez’. Diario de Barcelona (22 de abril de
1956).
Astrana Marín, Luis. ‘En el CCCXLI aniversario. Los herederos de
Miguel de Cervantes. Tres documentos cervantinos inéditos’. ABC
(23 de abril de 1957).
Jean Canavaggio
Jean Canavaggio was born on 23 July 1936 in Paris (16e), and he is
married to Perrine Ramin, a palaeographic archivist. Through his
biographical studies, Canavaggio effectively puts forth the idea that it is
impractical to write of the life of Cervantes without scrutinizing his
works in detail, separating them from other documentation, as
Fitzmaurice-Kelly did. Instead of citing documents or fragments of
information, he demonstrates his brilliant knowledge of Cervantes’s
works and focuses on the autobiographical elements within them. As a
result, the omission of testimonial documentation requires the reader to
know Cervantes’s biographical information and his works in great
detail because both are interrelated. What is more, Canavaggio’s
biography is directed exclusively at researchers advanced in the
knowledge of Cervantes’s life, works, and documentation, since many
times he does not explain his findings via documentation, as Astrana
Marín and Fitzmaurice-Kelly did. Finally, Canavaggio’s biography is an
analysis of the autobiographical fragments in the works, especially in
Los baños de Argel, el Trato de Argel, Don Quixote de la Mancha, and La
Galatea, and for this reason one must know very well Cervantes’s life in
order to be able to understand the pertinent aspects of his works.
Jean 
Canavaggio 
wrote 
and 
contributed 
to 
the 
following
publications on the life and works of Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra:
Canavaggio, Jean. Anthologie des Littératures européennes du XIe au
XXe siècles, sous la dir. de J. Bersani, en collab. av. R. Boyer, J.
Gattegno, J.P. Lefebvre, J.M. Luccioni, G. Nivat, G. Quinsat. (Paris:
Hachette Référence, 1995).
Canavaggio, Jean. ‘Aproximación al proceso Ezpeleta’. Cervantes no.
17.1 (1997): 25–45.
Canavaggio, Jean. Cervantès (Paris, Mazarine, 1986).
Canavaggio, Jean. Cervantes: en busca del perfil perdido (Madrid:
Espasa-Calpe, 1991).
Canavaggio, Jean. Cervantes, entre crítica y creación. (Alcalá de
Henares: Centro de Estudios Cervantinos, 2000).
Canavaggio, Jean. Cervantes y Valladolid (Castilla: Estudios de
Literatura, 2009).
Canavaggio, Jean. ‘Un compagnon de captivité de Cervantes: don
Fernando de Ormaza’. Melanges de la Casa de Velázquez (1966): pp.
339–43.
Canavaggio, Jean. Dictionnaire universel des Littératures, sous la
direction de Béatrice Didier (Paris: PUF, 1994).
Canavaggio, Jean. Retornos a Cervantes (New York: Instituto de
Estudios Auriseculares, 2014).
Translated by Aaron M. Kahn
Works Cited
Diccionario de literatura española e hispanoamericana, edited by Ricardo Gullón
(Madrid: Alianza, 1993).
Diccionario enciclopédico Espasa, 13 vols (Madrid: Espasa–Calpe, 1978).
Diccionario enciclopédico Peuser, 6 vols (Buenos Aires: Peuser, 1962–63).
Diccionario enciclopédico Salvat Universal, 20 vols (Barcelona–Madrid–Buenos
Aires–Caracas–Bogotá–Quito–Santiago–Río de Janeiro: Salvat Editores, 1969).
Diccionario enciclopédico U.T.E.H.A., 10 vols (México: Unión tipográfica editorial
hispano–americana, 1951)
Enciclopedia vniversal ilvstrada europeo–americana, 19 vols (Madrid: Espasa–
Calpe, 1905).
Gran Enciclopedia Larousse, 10 vols (París: Larousse, 1967).
Manuel de biografía y de bibliografía de los escritores del siglo XIX, 2 vols (París:
Librería de Rosa y Bouret, 1859).
Manuel del librero hispanoamericano, edited by Antonio Palau y Dulcet, 18 vols
(Barcelona: Librería Palau, 1957).
1 Mestre, p. lxxvii.
2 Mestre, pp. xc–xci.
3 Based on information from the Diccionario enciclopédico Espasa, vol. 10, p.
788 and Enciclopedia vniversal ilvstrada europeo–americana, vol. 51, p. 752.
4 Esta biografía está basada en las siguientes obras: Enciclopedia vniversal
ilvstrada evropeo–americana, pp. 151–2; Diccionario enciclopédico Peuser, vol. 5, p.
410; and Gran Enciclopedia Larousse, pp. 68–9.
5 Information is based on the following sources: Diccionario de literatura
española e hispanoamericana, vol. 1, 477; Manuel del librero hispanoamericano,
vol. 10, p. 208; Manuel de biografía…, vol. I, p. 210.
6 Information is based on the following sources: Diccionario enciclopédico
Espasa, vol. 6, p. 435; Diccionario enciclopédico Salvat Universal, vol. 11, p. 200;
Enciclopedia vniversal ilvstrada evropeo–americana, vol. 23, p. 1620; Diccionario
enciclopédico U.T.E.H.A., vol. V, p. 96; Gran enciclopedia Larousse, vol. 8, p. 883.
Chapter 29
Cervantes on Screen
Duncan Wheeler
University of Leeds
In April 2016, James Badcock asked: ‘Is it fair for Shakespeare to
overshadow Cervantes?’1 Rather than offer a response, he enumerates
some reasons as to why the centenary celebrations for the Spanish
literary giant were lacking in comparison with his English counterpart;
a lack of state investment and planning alongside a relatively low
number of film adaptations are highlighted, compounded by the
statistic that only one in ten Spaniards claim to have read the Quixote.
Notwithstanding the fact that the writer for the BBC does not always
compare like with like (fifty film adaptations of Don Quixote versus
over a thousand of Shakespeare’s thirty plus plays),2 he also fails to
take into account that, as Barbara Fuchs notes: ‘If the Spanish Golden
Age, and particularly Cervantes’s novel as its masterpiece, is perceived
to mark the beginning of the end for Spain, England’s Elizabethan
production is presented as evidence of its incipient glory.’3
The debut cinematic adaption of Don Quixote was produced in
France, and was first screened in the same year that Spain lost the final
vestiges of empire following defeat in the Spanish-American War. As
Germán Labrador Méndez has explored, the individual and collective
self-questioning that ensued returned (compulsively?) time and again to
Cervantes’s novel—‘It is, perhaps, more accurate to call the Generation
of ’98 the “Quixote Generation,” if one compares the large quantity of
Quixotist-inspired literature that was produced to the scant discussions
on the “Disaster”’4—forming an important constitutive role in the
forging of Hispanidad, ‘a universal trans-oceanic empire of language
and spirit’,5 which took on a less overtly bellicose and more
compensatory role in the wake of 1898. Beyond the Spanish-speaking
world, Don Quixote performed an important ambassadorial role, with
many of the world’s great film directors (Jean-Luc Godard, G.W. Pabst,
Éric Rohmer, Orson Welles, etc.) expressing their admiration for and
interest in Cervantes’s most famous creation, a subject that Rob Stone’s
upcoming project, for which he provided a fascinating trailer in a panel
discussion on ‘Don Quixote in Words, Pictures, and Film’ held at the
British Library on 1 April 2016, will explore more fully. The remit of
this chapter is more localized: to build upon the descriptive approach
that predominates in the existing bibliography6 in order to explore the
dialectic between commemorative culture and Spanish screen fictions
based on the life and works of Cervantes.
Francoism and Spain, Four Centuries after
the Birth of Cervantes
In his book Reflexivity in Film and Literature: From Don Quixote to Jean-
Luc Godard, Robert Stam observes how ‘Quixote’s utopianism operates
in the nostalgic mode; he denies the present in the name of a golden
age’.7 Unlike his character, however, the novelist, a ‘proleptically
modernist writer’,8 anticipates not only Cartesian doubt but also false
consciousness: ‘the Marxist critique of the ideological fiction of the
bourgeois social order can be seen as a working out, a deepening, of
certain features of the Cervantic critique’.9
In this section, I would like to suggest that some of the internal
contradictions of the Franco regime (1939–75) were brought to the fore
as it attempted to patent and commemorate Spain’s most renowned
literary figure as a means of resurrecting the Golden Age in a manner
more quixotic than Cervantine. The fourth centenary of the writer’s
birth, in 1947, took place in a climate in which the nascent dictatorship
promoted what Esther Martínez Tórtula terms the ‘anti-leyenda negra’
[anti-Black Legend].10 In line with this conception, ‘history education
was conceived as therapy—a wellspring of inspirational and
community-building assertions about national values and purposes that
could cure the unjustified inferiority from which Spaniards had suffered
since the eighteenth century’.11
Don Quixote was obligatory reading for schoolchildren of all ages
and, in the words of Fernando Valls:
The study of Cervantes…was always surrounded by non-literary
considerations. Judgements almost invariably verged on rhetorical
veneration and the thoughtful serious analysis of his work was
conspicuous by its absence. It is fair to say that our school-children
knew Cervantes’s biography alongside his patriotic exaltation better
than his important works.12
This is the context in which to locate the 1940s vogue for historical
epics, retrospectively referred to in such pejorative terms as papier
mâché cinema, which have come to function as a metonym for the
regime’s attempt to patent film for propagandistic and patriotic ends.
Although the Valencian production company CIFESA operated
during the Second Republic (1931–6), by the 1940s it was very much
seen to be the dictatorship’s dream factory, offering the closest Spanish
equivalent to Hollywood studios. From the pages of Primer Plano, a
magazine run by the Falange, the proto-fascist movement instrumental
to General Franco’s victory in the Civil War (1936–9), there were
repeated calls for the edifying past to be employed as the spiritual
building blocks for a brave new world: ‘historical cinema was one of
the first Falangist demands made in the name of a national cinema that
would respond to the needs of the new State’.13
During the so-called años de hambre [hunger years], CIFESA received
huge subsidies for what quixotically were hoped to be spiritually
nourishing blockbusters: the task of commemorating Cervantes’s birth
through a cinematic adaptation of the first European novel was
entrusted to Rafael Gil, the regime’s cinematic laureate, and CIFESA’s
chief executive, Vicente Casanova. The latter was bullish about
potential distribution for Don Quijote (1948) in foreign markets.14 Such
optimism was not born out in reality despite, or perhaps because of, the
film being heavily championed in a clumsily expressed document
produced for an English-speaking readership by the Spanish Diplomatic
Office. Claiming the ‘supreme distinction between some countries and
others is the predominance of the spirit in the course of their history,
with its impulses towards ardent and exemplary civilizing enterprises,
and not that of an insatiable materialism bent on ambitious
commerce’,15 the document offers to provide an unlimited supply of
Spanish spiritual truths in exchange for material investment. The
national cinema being insufficiently integrated into international
distribution networks is purported to be to everyone’s detriment when:
The most various themes and genres, present very special nuances of
their own in Spain, as her literature and painting show. In defence of
the highest ideals as they are, their historical development is exalted by
a heroism always clad in joyous simplicity…It is only these events
which with their everlasting interest, that deserve to be recalled on the
screen.16
The Civil War was, in many respects, a conflict over the right not only
to rule but also to define Spain. If Republican forces looked to adapt
Golden Age works to fit the needs of the present, Nationalist forces saw
the needs of the present to be rooted in the past.17 In keeping with this
ethic and aesthetic, Republican cinematic and theatrical adaptations
were dismissed as perversions of their author’s intentions, whilst the
rebels prided themselves as staying true to their original meanings. In
truth, the literary types most familiar from the Golden Age in 1940s
Spain were the picaroons and hidalgos. At a time when corruption was
rife, a small number of illicit fortunes were to be made. Early Modern
gentlemen would carry tooth picks to give the impression of having just
eaten whilst, as described in Camilo José Cela’s La colmena, clients
desperate to make ends meet would wear their only smart set of clothes
and nurse a single shot of coffee whilst idling their time away in cafes.
Gil prided himself on the fact that all of the dialogue contained in
his film adaptation was purportedly taken from Cervantes’s novel.18
This 
very 
literal 
interpretation 
hardly 
provides 
a 
hospitable
environment to render what Anthony J. Cascardi terms the ‘portal to
literary modernity’ on celluloid.19 There is a clear tension between the
epistemological framework of a dictatorship that claims a monopoly on
truth and what E.C. Riley terms ‘a novel of multiple perspectives.
Cervantes observes the world he creates from the viewpoints of
characters and reader as well as author. It is although he were playing
a game with mirrors, or prisms’.20 Gil’s positioning of himself and the
film allows for no such freedom, either ethically or aesthetically, whilst
failing to acknowledge that ‘when language is used in the cinema, it
forms part of a whole: the raw material of cinematic expression is an
indissoluble combination of picture, movement, and sound’.21
Given this backdrop, the quality of the resulting film is, perhaps,
surprisingly high, with celebrated Spanish film critic José Luis Castro
de Paz going as far as to describe it as ‘the most coherent cinematic
adaptation of Cervantes in the history of cinema’.22 The performances
are generally strong and feature early screen appearances from Sara
Montiel—Spanish cinema’s leading lady of the 1950s and 1960s—and
Fernando Rey, who would go on to be a staple in many of Luis Buñuel’s
films, as Antonia Quijano, Don Quixote’s niece, and the student Sansón
Carrasco respectively. Although all the dialogue contained in the film
can be found in the novel, Gil does carry out an effective act of
synthesis, effectively establishing a hierarchy whereby Don Quixote and
Sancho’s sallies are, for example, given priority over the interpolated
tales, which make selective appearances; Cardenio makes a fleeting
appearance, but there is no mention of Catalan bandit Roque Ginart.
Although the first part of the novel takes place in a circumscribed
geographical area, characters and tales serve to locate Don Quixote’s
exploits and journeys within a broader milieu that is largely excised
from Gil’s film adaptation. The iconic topography of La Mancha is
afforded visual prominence in the film, almost a character in and of
itself.
This is, perhaps, a legacy of ‘Las rutas del Quijote’, a series of
picturesque touristic features that Luis Buñuel chose to exhibit in the
Spanish Pavilion at the Paris Universal Exposition in 1937,23 and a
precursor to Volver (Pedro Almodóvar, 2006) in which the combination
of windmills (or turbines) and arid landscapes serve to locate the
viewer in a specific socio-cultural geographical milieu. In the post-war
period, La Mancha was particularly amenable to a project of national
literary recuperation at a time when the ‘essence of the Spanish
character was usually seen as being embodied in the virtues of the
Spanish small-holding peasantry of Castile’.24 What this bypasses is the
underlying tragicomedy of the fact it ‘was a region associated with
backward rusticity, thus a fittingly ironic context for the hero’s
idealised literary fantasies’.25
The messianic nostalgia for Spain’s former greatness echoed Don
Quixote more clearly than it did Cervantes. In line with this disparity,
Gil’s film domesticates the source-text, bypassing the author’s
transgressive irony rendering, for example, the denouement, in terms of
an unequivocally redemptive narrative. As Carlos F. Heredero notes: ‘In
this Christianized Quixote made to measure for National-Catholocism,
the gentleman repents for his madness and dies calling upon Jesus. The
conversion of the prosaic truth of orthodox reality with no alternatives
is forcefully imposed’.26 This is not, however, to say, that there are no
fissures through which the harsher and more ambivalent realities of the
material world do not encroach. Although never coming close to
registering the poverty and hunger with which a high proportion of
Spaniards lived during the post-Civil War years, a number of scenes
showing peasants at work in the fields or at play in the inn are,
especially when viewed from the present, remarkably similar to the
neo-realism being championed as a form of cinematic expression and
social protest in Italy. The tension between the folkloric appeal of rustic
continuity and the harsh reality of economic underdevelopment would
also come to the fore visually through a series of documentaries—e.g.
Por tierras de Don Quijote [In the Land of Don Quixote] (José María
Elorrieta, 1946) and Los caminos de Don Quijote [Don Quixote’s
Pathways] (Luciano G. Egido, 1961)—which increasingly found a ready
outlet in the nascent television industry. Belying the celebratory aims
of the programme-makers, present-day images of prematurely aged
peasants going about physically arduous rural labour lend themselves
to be interpreted in a critical vein. Even in a clearly propagandistic
endeavour, the novel was never completely domesticated and,
unwittingly, the most faithful aspect of Gil’s film is how it adheres to
‘the mixture of high romance and precise documentary detail’ that
Barry W. Ife highlights as Cervantes’s trademark.27 Lacking, however, is
what Stephen Boyd characterizes as Cervantes’s ‘profound respect for
the mystery and unfathomability of reality itself’,28 similarly a hallmark
of much of the finest cinema.
Cervantes Biopics under Dictatorship and
Democracy
In the prologue to a literary biography of Cervantes published in 2015,
Jordi Gracia writes: ‘The identification of his life with his fictional work
is such a false and miserable enterprise that it was retired years ago’.29
This is not, of course, to say that the experiences of this early modern
writer did not impact on his literary production. Gracia, for example,
charts a trajectory by which real-life disillusionment makes Cervantes
more self-aware, allowing him to conquer irony and produce his
masterpieces late in life. In a major English-language literary biography
produced for the fourth centenary of Cervantes’s death, William
Egginton arrives at a similar conclusion:
he responded to the despair of his failed expectations with the equally
caustic and generous wit of his fiction, turning the word and all its false
promises into the canvas for his newfound prose, and instilling his
characters with an emotional depth and reality that has never been seen
before.30
In more concrete terms, María Antonia Garcés prefaces her textual
analysis with literary biography, by encouraging an affirmative
response to a formulation of her own: ‘One wonders if Cervantes would
have become the great literary creator he was if he hadn’t suffered the
traumatic experience of his Algerian captivity’.31
Whilst 
there 
is 
something 
suspiciously 
neat 
about 
the
straightforward equation of failure in life with success in letters,
alongside personal suffering with empathy for others, this narrative
does provide an antidote to the moral and heuristic triumphalism
which, for example, led the magazine of the national military legion to
patent Cervantes’s as ‘the foremost plume of Spanish arms; if the
Quixote is righteous and carries the foundations of the Spanish
gentleman’s code in a perpetually universal air it is because it carries
with it something of the essence and power of the first book of the
military profession (The Ordnances)’.32 Whilst the patenting of giants of
the Golden Age such as Lope de Vega or Calderón de la Barca has
ensured that they continue to be considered reactionary figures in
Spain,33 the author of Don Quixote has evaded this fate largely because,
‘he was at the same time inside and outside the mainstream of Spanish
life’.34
In sharp contrast to the Franco period, the ‘social, cultural, national,
and religious heterodoxy of the spaces of war, together with the
porosity of the borders and contact zones in which the soldiers spent
most of their daily lives, facilitated unexpected exchanges and
solidarities’.35 That ‘Cervantes possessed a wealth of cross-cultural
experience exceeding that of other writers of his time’ makes his
biography an attractive albeit expensive proposition for filmmakers.36
Dulcinea (Vicente Escrivá, 1963)—the second cinematic adaptation of
the eponymous play by Frenchman Gaston Baty—had been distributed
internationally as Girl from La Mancha, reaching commercial cinemas in
the United States; four years later, the high production values of
French-Spanish-Italian coproduction Cervantes (Vincent Sherman, 1967)
clearly showed aspirations for it to be a global blockbuster. A
swashbuckling action adventure, the eponymous protagonist is depicted
as a patriotic quixotic figure with an eye for the ladies, but whose first
loyalty is to God and country. In sharp contrast to the seeming
indifference of the Crown and ecclesiastical authorities to potential
Muslim incursions into Southern Spain, Cervantes’s motive for going to
Rome is to provide support for a much beleaguered Catholic Church.
Adopting poetic license, the soldier-author is depicted as an innocent
abroad in a city that is both corrupt and corrupting, suffering his first
major disillusionment when he falls in love with a woman, not
realizing she is a prostitute.
The battle of Lepanto is shot in suitably epic style; a combination of
the personal, political, and literary coming to the fore as Cervantes
witnesses the death of a rotund comrade-in-arms, Sancho, an old friend
from Alcalá de Henares. Veterans of the naval battle are given short
shrift by the Crown, but Cervantes receives a letter of commendation
from Don Juan de Austria. As was the case in real-life, this leads his
captors to overestimate his economic standing and social importance
when he is taken captive in Algiers. The historiographical question of
how and why the real-life Cervantes was clearly awarded preferential
treatment by the notoriously bloodthirsty King Hassan is explained
away by the interpolated fictional conceit of them having previously
met when Cervantes was his tour guide in Italy.37 This benevolent
treatment contrasts with the pitiful sight of ravaged old men with long
beards who, in what is implied to be influences on the subsequent
construction of the character of Don Quixote, are seen to have gone
mad awaiting their release. In order to avoid this fate, Cervantes
organizes a plan for escape alongside his brother. They are betrayed
and the plan foiled but, even under torture, he refuses to give the name
of his co-conspirators. A melodramatic twist is then applied to the
historical record as Cervantes is on the executioner’s block to be
beheaded just as his ransom money arrives from Spain; whilst it is not
quite sufficient, his fellow Spaniards each contribute a few coins until
the stipulated quantity is amassed. By focusing only on the early part of
the writer’s life, the viewer is presented with a youthful hero whose
subsequent writings from a largely disillusioned old age are
foreshadowed but not depicted directly, thereby facilitating a more
uplifting narrative than might otherwise have been possible. Cervantes
is enjoyable enough but it failed to translate into international markets
and, even at home, where audiences were arguably resistant to
domestic heroic narratives after the more explicit indoctrination of the
early Francoist period, the film was seen by 654,226 spectators.38
Although this was a respectable turn-out, it was likely insufficient to
recoup the film’s production costs. Un diablo bajo la almohada [A Devil
under the Pillow] (José María Forqué, 1968), a much lower-budget
Spanish-Italian coproduction loosely based on El curioso impertinente,
was seen by marginally more viewers, attracting 790,697 spectators to
the cinema. In a period of relaxed censorship, especially in terms of
sexual mores, the tantric voyeurism that underpins the relationships
between Anselmo, Lotario, and Camila provided ideal source material
for a film featuring Alfredo Landa, fast emerging as the undisputed star
of a nascent genre of Iberian sex-comedies. Although it is an
interpolated tale contained in Part I of the Quixote, the structural,
thematic and moral parallels between El curioso impertinente and
Cervantes’s Novelas ejemplares are well documented;39 these concise
narratives have not had as much of an international profile in film, but
have proved popular choices for Spanish television.40
Short, self-contained pedagogic narratives were, in principle, ideally
suited for the small screen, although their exemplarity did not always
go uncontested. Celebrated filmmaker Basilio Martín Patino was
commissioned to direct a version of Rinconete y Cortadillo for the state
television channel as part of a series titled ‘Tradiciones y leyendas
españolas’ [‘Traditions and Spanish Legends’]. Manuel Fraga, the
Minister of Information and Tourism, nevertheless personally
intervened to stop shooting. The filmmaker is unsure of the exact
reasons but speculates that it might relate to concerns harboured by the
municipal authorities in Seville as to how a depiction of the criminal
underworld in the past would reflect on the city in the present,
alongside the presence of Agustín García Poro, a university professor
out of work due to his political idea(l)s.41 El licenciado vidriera (Jesús
Fernández Santos, 1974) was a less contested television adaptation,
starring young heartthrob Emilio Gutiérrez Caba in the eponymous lead
role, and featuring an introduction by Alonso Zamora Vicente, the-
then-President of the Real Academia Española. The forty-five minute
programme drew on both the Golden Age source-text and a reworking
by Azorín published in 1915 in anticipation of the third centenary of
Cervantes’s death. In addition to functioning as an effective framing
device, the presence of both a diegetic and an extra-diegetic narrator
compensates for budgetary constraints as the graduate’s journey to Italy
is, for example, indicated through visual references to artworks and
maps rather than location shooting.
Whilst television is primarily a domestic medium and Cervantes had
failed to find a foothold in the international marketplace, the figure of
Don Quixote alongside the equation of the Cervantes and his most
famous literary creation was sufficiently universal to be registered in
Man of La Mancha (Arthur Hiller, 1972)—a cinematic adaptation
starring Peter O’Toole and Sophie Loren based on the Broadway play of
the same name—and Don Quijote cabalga de nuevo [Don Quixote Sets
Forth 
Again] 
(Roberto 
Gavaldón, 
1973), 
a 
Mexican-Spanish
coproduction in which Spanish actor Fernando Fernán-Gómez takes
second billing to Cantinflas—the international star sometimes referred
to as the Mexican Charlie Chaplin—as Sancho. Peter O’Toole and
Fernando Fernán-Gómez are two of the best on-screen Quixotes largely
due to their expressive faces and abilities to act through their bodies as
with words, a characteristic generally shared by the more accomplished
performances of Sancho.
In Don Quijote cabalga de nuevo, Cervantes comes across the two
characters in his capacity as a tax collector. After witnessing Sancho
deliver a showcase speech tailor-made for Cantinflas’s persona on the
fiscal abuses to which the poor are subject(ed), the writer notes down
that he would make a good character for a novel; whilst, in the midst of
hearing a diatribe by Don Quixote on the ethical advantages of
subscribing to the ostensibly anachronistic values of virtue and justice,
Cervantes crosses out his initial reference to this ‘loco’ [madman]. The
framing device of Man of La Mancha is more intricate: Cervantes
appears in a staged public parody of an auto de fe. As the fake flames
depict his execution, all-too-real inquisitors appear in the town and
arrest him. Thrown into jail, his fellow prisoners steal the manuscript of
Don Quixote and tell him he can have it back if and only if he recounts
the tale in a sufficiently compelling manner.
One of the challenges to the commercial prowess of Don Quixote is
the fact its leading lady is ‘una moza aldeana, y no de muy buen rostro,
porque era carirredonda y chata’ [‘a village girl, and not a very pretty
one at that, she being round faced and flat nosed’].42 As with the
cinematic makeover of Dulcinea or Gil’s adaptation, the actresses cast
for Man of La Mancha and Don Quijote cabalga de nuevo pertain more
closely to Don Quixote’s perception of reality. The two films develop
the role largely by making her the victim of sexual harassment,
somewhat distastefully depicted in an eroticized manner, a particularly
unfortunate fashion in 1970s cinema. This was, however, nothing in
comparison to The Amorous Adventures of Don Quixote and Sancho
Pancha (Raphael Nussbaum, 1976), shot on location in Spain but
produced by a North American studio. A slightly edited version was
belatedly released in Spain in 1978, a revised title—Las eróticas
aventuras de Don Quijote [The Erotic Adventures of Don Quixote]—
shamelessly designed to capitalize on the trend for explicit sexual
material following the death of Franco, and the ostensible end of film
censorship. In an open letter to the admittedly reactionary Arriba
newspaper, reader Marcelo Arriata-Jauregi demanded to know:
What legal route remains for the justified protest against this fact, if it
has been the Ministry of Culture—whose very name is similarly
unfathomable in relation to this matter—who has authorized its regular
release, in the name of a very literal interpretation of freedom of
expression? The Madrid release date was quite possibly chosen to avoid
protests from important cultural bodies—I am thinking of the various
Royal Academies—who would immediately be given an official
audience.43
The Royal Academies did not intervene with the Ministry of Culture,
the rebranded Ministry of Information and Tourism, but Cervantes
would increasingly be given explicit official recognition as a privileged
icon of democratic culture and consolidation. As Sarah Bowskill notes,
the Premio Cervantes, established in 1976, ‘can be seen as responding
to the new State’s need for political legitimacy as well as its desire to
reestablish a cultural profile on the world stage’.44 The prize winner—
convention dictates that writers from Spain alternate with those from
Latin America—is announced in November or December, with the
ceremony held in Cervantes’s home-town of Alcalá de Henares in April
of the following year to coincide with the anniversary of the writer’s
death and the National Book Day, in the presence of the recipient, the
Minister of Culture, and the King of Spain.
In 1978, Televisión Española had an unexpected success in the
former USSR and China with an animated version of Don Quixote, made
incredibly profitable because the Spanish national television station
was uninterested in the programmes offered in exchange, and brokered
a deal by which they had rights to advertising on the state Chinese
broadcaster, a slot then sold on to North American multinational Pepsi
Cola.45 More generally, resources available to the state broadcaster at a
time when the absence of privately-owned channels ensured it had a
monopoly on the lucrative advertising market is manifest in the heavily
promoted nine-episode prestige biopic, Cervantes (Alfonso Ungría,
1981), a peripatetic narrative in which the beautiful interiors of the
Alhambra in Granada stand in for Algiers.
Although historically well-documented in parts—much was made of
the consultative role of Nobel-prize winner and member of the Royal
Spanish Academy, Camilo José Cela—overall the series’ eight-hour
running time was needlessly long, the product and cause of a
cumbersome narrative device by which a fictional character attempts to
ascertain more details about the biography of an infirm old Cervantes
in order to secure him a pension. References to the prejudices and
travails of Spain’s morisco population have been almost completely
excised, whilst Moorish characters are, somewhat counter-intuitively,
played by Spanish actors—a sharp contrast to the 1968 biopic, most
likely a legacy of the close links fostered between Spain and Morocco
immediately after the Civil War46—and a fetishistic delight is taken in
registering their sadism in torturing flagellated Christian bodies.
The television series does admittedly critique false piety in Spain,
with Cervantes bearing witness to a degree of poverty in his travels that
had been intimated but not so much explicitly shown in earlier screen
representations. By the closing episodes, the series had become
resolutely bizarre. An increasingly dishevelled Cervantes has become
something of a bystander to his own biography, listening to a dandyish
Lope de Vega give forth on the Novelas ejemplares whilst having his hair
cut, or attending a student adaptation of the Quixote at the University
of Alcalá de Henares. The writer dies at the end of episode eight, with
the final scene functioning as an epilogue of sorts whereby the graduate
attempts to clear Cervantes’s record with the Holy Office. This
endeavour could hardly have been less successful, and flashbacks are
used to reveal Cervantes’s previous clashes with the establishment that
serve to reinforce rather than counteract the black legend surrounding
Spain’s past. Hence, for example, we see Cervantes and his sister
(Magdalena) mocked for being Jewish after they leave the public
burning and torture of heretics by the Inquisition in front of a baying
crowd. A Manichean division between the writer and the society that
brought him forth is given undue weight through the incorporation of a
voiceover being used for the first time in the series just before the
closing credits to provide explicit commentary on the visual image of
Cervantes’s tombstone being shattered on Inquisition orders.
‘Leaving aside its filmic innovations, Cervantes is, first and foremost,
a plea for cultural dissidence and freedom of expression.’47 Broadcast in
the same year as an unsuccessful coup attempt when armed guards
entering the national parliament, the controversy surrounding the
liberties taken with the historical record, perceived by many as an
attempt to impose an aggressively left-wing agenda, were such that an
episode of the televised debate show La clave [The Key on Cervantes],
which brought together members of the Real Academia Española
alongside programme makers, was broadcast.48 The privileging of
ethics over aesthetics provides one likely explanation as to why, despite
huge promotion, Cervantes was not that popular with audiences,
achieving far lower viewing figures than equivalent literary adaptations
and historical biopics such as Fortuna y Jacinta (Mario Camus, 1980) or
Teresa de Jesús (Josefina Molina, 1984).49 Many of these series,
Cervantes included, pre-dated the 1982 election of the PSOE and Felipe
González to national government—the first time the Spanish left had
been in power since the Second Republic—but they heralded the arrival
of a heritage aesthetic and the generous funding of prestige literary
products that would come to dominate state-funded cinema
production.50
1992: A Cervantine Centenary?
A cultural priority from the outset of Socialist rule was the
commemoration of the Fifth Centenary of Columbus’s arrival in
America that would take place a decade later.51 Cervantes ostensibly
has little relation with 1992, but he was a clear benefactor of state
investment in commemorating the ‘discovery’ of the New World: there
was a television series of Part I of the Quixote; a quasi-documentary
reconstruction of Orson Welles’s quixotic attempts to complete a
modern-day cinematic version of the first European novel; and the
baptism of a new cultural body—the closest equivalent to the British
Council—as the Instituto Cervantes. If, in the Early Modern period,
imperial and cultural hegemony were seen to be inextricably linked (it
is no coincidence that the Genovese adventurer first set sail under the
Spanish flag in the same year that the first systematic grammar of any
European language, Antonio de Nebrija’s Gramática de la lengua
castellana, was made available), literature constituted the more
diplomatic face of empire in late-twentieth century democratic Spain.
According to Giulia Quaggio, ‘The creation of a network of Instituto
Cervantes centres had the goal of putting colonial ghosts to rest,
affirming Spain’s condition as a country with an immense cultural
heritage’.52 This was clearly the message the PSOE wanted to convey,
construing it as ‘an occasion to celebrate cosmopolitanism and
pluralism’.53 If Cervantes lent himself to being appropriated as
cosmopolitan pluralistic icon, then we must nevertheless remain alert
to the fact that culture can serve to masquerade as well as to replace
neo-colonial intentions. Spain is the largest investor in Latin America
after the US, an economic reality cannily exploited by then-President
Felipe González and his right-wing successor, José María Aznar, to
optimize influence in the European context. As Stephanie Dennison
observes:
Spanish culture—for which Cervantes is an iconic figure and metonymic
shorthand—cannot and should not be separated from broader patterns
and processes from the last twenty-five years through which there has
been a seeming pattern of re-colonisation by Spain of Latin America
(this time including Brazil) as witnessed in both recent economic
penetration, ‘Hispanic’ cultural initiatives being led by Spain, and the
‘subaltern’ position being assumed by a new wave of immigrants
arriving in Spain from Latin America seeking work.54
Although, as Dennison rightly cautions, the repercussions of the
financial crisis in Spain and the rise of some former European colonies
nuances the situation, transatlantic relations are underpinned by Spain
being subject to a double ignominy: the spectre of empire combined
with the absence of significant imperial loot in cultural, political, or
economic terms.
Francoist Spain, replete with bullfighters and flamenco singers,
constituted a pleasure playground and retreat for Orson Welles. In the
words of James Naremore, ‘we can sense Welles’s nostalgia for pre-
industrial innocence and his identification with the ageing knight.
Clearly he wants to see this film (and his entire career) in some sense as
an impossible, quixotic adventure’.55 The filmmaker referred to his
ongoing but never completed film of Don Quixote as ‘El mio bambino’,56
and held an essentialist view of Cervantes seemingly informed by
Francoist tropes: ‘His scepticism was an affectation befitting an
intellectual of his kind, and I believe that beneath his scepticism was a
man who loved knight-errants as much as Don Quixote did’.57 If it is
axiomatic to the point of cliché to superimpose Don Quixote’s
psychological profile onto Cervantes, it also provides an attractive
lineage 
for 
maverick 
creators 
who 
feel 
frustrated 
and/or
underappreciated; this tendency most explicitly comes to the fore in
Lost in La Mancha (Terry Gilliam, 2002),58 a documentary about the
filmmaker’s financially disastrous attempts to bring Don Quixote to the
big screen, in which British director Terry Gilliam clearly seeks to
present himself as heir to both Welles and Cervantes. After years in the
wilderness, the British-Spanish coproduction The Man who Killed Don
Quixote (Terry Gilliam, 2018), starring Jonathan Pryce and Adam
Driver, premiered at the Cannes Film Festival.59 Reviews in Spain as
elsewhere were respectful,60 focusing on the septuagenarian director’s
illustrious career, despite the film being borderline offensive in its
clichéd images of Cervantes’s homeland, replete with flamenco and
gypsies, and clumsy attempts to shoehorn contemporary concerns into
a sprawling narrative. Gilliam describes his character Angélica, an
innkeeper’s daughter who first finds local fame in a short film aged
fifteen before winding up an escort and a model when attempts to
become a star in Madrid go awry: ‘In the age of #MeToo, here’s a girl
who takes responsibility for her state’.61
The combination of great filmmakers and the Cervantine
masterpiece is not guarantee of success. Welles’s footage has circulated
in numerous guises for many years. Greek director Costa Gavras
assembled forty minutes of scenes to be screened at the Cannes Film
Festival 
in 
1986.62 
Largely 
funded 
by 
the 
Fifth 
Centenary
Commemorations funds, Jesús Franco—a veteran director, specializing
in sexually explicit exploitation films made at speed—was, however,
charged with making a film out of the extant footage. Joseph McBride
refers to the resulting film as the ‘Franco fiasco’;63 whilst Jonathan
Rosenbaum spoke of how he likes what he has seen of Welles’s footage,
but cannot stand what Jesús’s Franco editing did with it.64 Leaving
aside copyright issues, which meant the Spanish filmmaker could not
use all of what Welles shot (hence, for example, a scene featuring
Sancho and Don Quixote in a cinema posted on YouTube as ‘the six
most beautiful moments in the history of cinema’ is left out),65 it is
difficult to make a defence for a film that renders the footage in poor
quality and in a largely incomprehensible order, indiscriminately
combining materials designed for the film project with Welles’s home
movies of his travels through Spain. If the film’s redeeming feature
(now largely made obsolete by the internet) is to have the opportunity
of watching one of the world’s great filmmaker grapple with a great
literary works, the whole project reveals the symptoms of national
insecurity in its readiness to showcase Welles’s obvious fascination with
Spain and its national cultural production. A similar attitude underpins
Esteve Riambau’s claim that ‘had he been able to exhibit it as he
wanted, it would have constituted an industrial revolution of such a
magnitude that the only point of comparison would be what he himself
established with Citizen Kane’.66
Quixotic bravura was also in display in the promotion of Televisión
Española’s television series broadcast in 1992. In the words of Manuel
Palacio, the state broadcaster:
prepared the best and biggest promotional campaign ever seen; the
season’s premiere was adorned with references to the emblematic
nature of the book and the cultural importance it had on all languages
and cultures alongside the international prizes bestowed on the series;
to sum up, Manuel Gutiérrez Aragón’s Quixote appeared on the
television as an event of national significance.67
Made with high production values and featuring strong lead
performances from Fernando Rey and Alfredo Landa as the knight and
his squire, the film is too heavily in thrall to the literary masterpiece,
effectively providing a colour version of Rafael Gil’s 1947 film,
somewhat tediously elongated to a running time of over five hours.
As Dona M. Kercher notes, the aesthetic of the television series is
counter-intuitive given Manuel Gutiérrez Aragón’s irreverent nods to
Cervantes in previous works;68 Maravillas (1981) playfully echoes the
Quixote through the burning of pornographic publications that obsess
the protagonist, a former celebrity photographer played by Fernando
Fernán-Gómez; La noche más hermosa [The Most Beautiful Night] (1984),
set in and around the studios of Televisión Española, mirrors El curioso
impertinete in its narrative whilst parodying the kind of prestige project
Don Quixote would turn into. Enthralled by the literary antecedent, the
piety of the television series betrays the irreverent bricolage of the
original. No equivalent cinematic device is found to replicate or
reinvigorate the novel’s narrative palimpsests or the delight Cervantes
takes in the subjective orality of story-telling; hence, for example,
Dorotea lamenting her amorous misfortunes cuts from her opening her
mouth to the story being told in objective flash-back. Although the
actors generally acquit themselves well, scenes featuring Don Quixote
and Cardenio as mad are exaggerated to the point of caricature.
In a more positive vein, ‘[i]t is now a video classic that will
perpetuate the story of Don Quixote, quite sophisticatedly, for more
millions who will never read the book’.69 Mario Camus was going to
film the second part of the novel for the small screen. However,
financial cutbacks in state television with the arrival of the new private
channels alongside Fernando Rey’s death in 1994 thwarted the original
plan, and the second part would not be filmed until 2002 when
Gutiérrez Aragón filmed it for release in cinemas as El caballero Don
Quijote (2002). Effective use is made of location filming to contrast the
final scenes shot by the sea near Barcelona with the arid landscape of
Castile, whilst Don Quixote’s two duels are imaginatively staged with
the Knight of the Mirrors battle attire proving a definite highlight. Juan
Luis Galiardo and Carlos Iglesias make a slightly incongruous Quixote
and Sancho for there is little difference in height or weight. Their
interplay nevertheless proves to be one of the film’s highlights,
affording prominence to what Edwin Williamson has characterized as
the power-struggles between knight and squire, which this critic
believes ‘provide the narrative in Part Two with the principle of unity
that Cervantes had been seeking’.70 Unfortunately, however, any
potential unity is undercut by the clumsy condensation of the novel to
a feature-length film resulting in a series of disjointed episodes likely to
confuse the viewer not previously familiar with the source-text. For
commercial reasons, it was decided not to announce it as the second
part as it was felt this might be off-putting to viewers who had not seen
Part I.71 This strategy was unsuccessful, only 75,004 cinema tickets
being sold in Spain. This was hardly the best omen for the novel’s
upcoming fourth anniversary.
From Boom to Bust: The Tale of Two
Centenaries (2005–16)
Buoyed by a construction boom and the provision of cheap labour
through mass immigration, Spain’s economy appeared to be in rude
health under the Presidency of José María Aznar and the right-of-centre
Partido Popular. In his first public measure as Socialist opposition
leader in 2000, José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero announced a cultural
initiative to culminate in the four hundredth centenary of the Quixote.
Following an unexpected election victory in 2004, the PSOE pledged
thirty million Euros to what Minister of Culture, Carmen Calvo,
characterized as a ‘state project’ that would ‘grow each day’, building
upon ‘the high ethical idealism of the first modern novel’.72 This was
not, however, reflected in screen fictions, most likely because Gutiérrez
Aragón’s adaptations had been made relatively recently and, more
cynically, due to the lead-in time required when many arrangements
for the often exorbitantly budgeted projects were not made until the
last minute.
Gutiérrez Aragón’s literate visions of the Cervantine novel have
arguably rendered more literal adaptations redundant, and more
irreverent takes on the writer and his works have begun to emerge, as
can be seen in two radically different projects: austere Catalan art-film
Honor de cavallería (Albert Serra, 2006) and historical romp Miguel y
William (Inés París, 2007). Largely eschewing linear narrative
comprehensibility, in the former:
The opening shot lays bare the film’s intentions: the camera scrutinizes
the wiry old man as he picks up pieces of armour from the floor and
carries them to the plump figure waiting to patiently under a nearby
tree. The old man’s movements, along with the camera’s nervous
curiosity, combine to give an unstable, fleeting impression which
accentuates an inherent imbalance and distorted vision: at certain
points, the faithful squire is relegated to the far edge of the frame, and
in other shots we lose sight of the knight-errant completely. The trend is
set from this moment on, as the screen fills with successive shots of
unblemished countryside as a backdrop to the aimless wandering of the
adventurers, reduced at times to mere silhouettes, as in the night shots
when it is almost impossible to discern the protagonists, and the
audience is left even more clueless as to what they might be doing.73
Shot over ten days in 2005 in hilly areas around Gerona, a self-
conscious geographical contrast to the flat plains of Castile, the film is,
as Chris Perriam has explored, a minimalist adaptation of an iconic
story, sharply attuned to specific tones and preoccupations (e.g. to
questions of arms and spirituality, and the assertion of dignity and
honour in the face of absurdity/adversity). There are extreme ellipses
and jumps to, for example, moments that the novel’s translator
supposedly left out alongside several recapitulations of paradigmatic
non-moments such as the knight and squire spending the night in the
open fields.74
When dogged literalism has been the prevailing trend in cinematic
adaptations of the Quixote, Serra ought perhaps to be commended for
his attempt to locate a new register, rendering a dialogue-heavy
psychologically-complex novel through images rather than words. The
proverbially verbose Sancho is markedly prone to silence. Intimacy
between master and squire is intimated through their physical
ramblings as they walk together arm-in-arm; Don Quixote, seemingly
suffering from some dementia-related ailment, is shown scared and
alone calling out for his friend. According to the back cover of the DVD
release, it was: ‘One of the year’s most acclaimed films by the most
demanding international critics (Cahiers du Cinéma, Cinemascope, Film
Comment) and, without a doubt, the most original and daring Spanish
film of recent years’. The film had its champions but, as with much so-
called ‘slow cinema’, there is, in the words of Nick James (editor of film
magazine Sight & Sound), ‘an implicit threat: admit you’re bored and
you’re a philistine’;75 in other words, an argument could be made that
we are dealing with a twenty-first century variation of the Cervantine
entremés, El retablo de las maravillas. In reality, much of the audience at
Cannes walked out of the screening before the end, whilst, as Adam
Bingham notes, the few spectators who remained to the end of a
screening at the 2007 Spanish and Latin American Film Festival were
unimpressed with ‘Cervantes by way of Samuel Beckett filtered through
the cinematic idiom of early Pasolini, Bresson, Pialat, or Antonioni’.76
In marked contrast, the light-hearted Miguel y William fills in a gap
in Shakespeare’s biography with a speculative fantasy by which he
follows Leonor, a young actress of Spanish descent with whom he has
fallen in love in London, back to Castile where she has been matched
with an aged duke, an extremely ugly but wealthy widower. Cervantes
arrives at the Duke’s palace in his capacity as a tax collector, and is
asked by Leonor to write a play for her upcoming wedding. The
meeting of the two literary giants first occurs when Shakespeare has to
make a quick escape from the actress’s room through her window. The
older Cervantes, played by Juan Luis Galiardo, also falls for Leonor,
and his competition with his English counterpart is more sexual than
literary. Reminiscent of Shakespeare in Love (John Madden, 1998), the
narrative is generously peppered with learned references. The English
Bard comes up with lines such as ‘My kingdom for a horse’ as he
witnesses events unfurl, whilst he names a rotund but good-natured
servant Sancho. More substantially, Shakespeare’s observations of
Spanish mores inspire him to write Othello. In order to protect her
maidenhood, Leonor and William only ever have anal sex. On the day
of her wedding, the Duke whispers as they take their vows that he will
treat her like the harlot she is; when she replies by detailing her sexual
activities with her lover, her new husband faints and dies. Much to the
consternation of his daughters, the freshly widowed Duchess is now
free to love whomever she wants. All’s well that ends well!
Shakespeare and Cervantes might reputedly have died on the same
day, but, perhaps unsurprisingly, the figure with whom the Spanish
novelist most regularly appears in screen fictions is his rival, Lope de
Vega. This has generally been framed in binary terms, chiming with
heuristic strategies in criticism, which, as Melanie Henry laments,
‘underscore persistently ubiquitous anti-Lope aspects…closing down
rather than opening up lines of enquiry which could consider
Cervantes’s theatre on its own aesthetic terms and the wider socio-
cultural concerns at stake’.77 Lope (Andrucha Waddington, 2010)
features the eponymous monster of nature correcting Numancia to help
Cervantes find an audience, something that this costly Spanish-
Brazilian coproduction failed to achieve.
The commercial failure of the biopic did not bode well for 2016,
especially when government investment for the centenary celebrations
was less than seven and a half million Euros,78 a mere fraction of that
allocated in 2005. In an increasingly competitive audio-visual market,
the state broadcaster no longer has at its disposal the resources it did in
the 1980s, or even in the 1990s, but is effectively charged with the
responsibility of commemorating Cervantes’s death, largely ignored by
the private television channels whose brief and financially unsuccessful
investment into narratives from the Golden Age has seemingly come to
an end.79 TVE’s most significant contribution formed part of the second
season of television series, El Ministerio del Tiempo [The Time Ministry],
a surprise hit which has become a unique cultural phenomenon.80
The eponymous Ministry ostensibly functions like any Spanish state
institution, but with the specificity that its civil servants travel back in
time in order to prevent history as we know it from being changed. In
the first season, there was an episode on Lope in which agents are sent
back after being informed he might embark on a boat, which will not
return from the Spanish Armada. Various amorous entanglements
ensure he misses his assignment and embarks on one of the few vessels
to survive the navel disaster. The programme fully exploits the
opportunities for humour afforded by temporal anachronisms. Hence,
for example, when agents quote some lines from heavy metal group
Leño’s song, ‘Maneras de vivir’ (a running motif throughout the series)
in the seventeenth century, Lope ruminates on their origins and
speculates they might be fresh from Góngora’s plume. In series two, an
episode titled ‘Tiempo de hidalgos’ [‘An Age of Gentleman’] features
two agents being sent back to the seventeenth century to prevent
Cervantes from selling the Spanish language manuscript of Don Quixote
to what he believes are two Englishmen—they are in fact Americans
from the future planning to make their fortunes through a digitalization
project—a transaction he hopes will provide funding to stage Los baños
de Argel.
The Ministry’s agents infiltrate the theatre company in order to
sabotage the production in the hope this will inspire Cervantes to
rewrite his literary masterpiece. The ruse is unsuccessful, but the
production does not go ahead as the death of a Flanders veteran leads
to an official mourning period in which the theatres are closed.
Cervantes is transported forward to Alcalá in 2016, where he is amazed
by the heritage industry that has grown up around Don Quixote. With a
knowing wink to Calderón’s La vida es sueño [Life is a Dream], he is
subsequently drugged and returned to the Early Modern period where
he proceeds to write the source novel. Lope makes a number of cameo
appearances throughout the episode, shown to be an irresponsible
albeit charming and talented playboy, a perhaps unfortunate
reinforcement of the aforementioned Manichean opposition. This
caveat aside, El Ministerio del Tiempo has a refreshing irreverence both
to the past and to Spain’s literary canon, and is more enjoyable than
Televisión Española’s other two centenary productions: pseudo-
documentary Cervantes versus Lope and an adaption of exemplary tale
La española inglesa.
The former features a film crew from the present going back into the
past to interview the protagonists, exploring the possibility that Lope
might have been responsible for the writing of Avellaneda’s sequel to
the Quixote. Reiterating the most basic clichés—Lope is first shown in
bed with a topless Jerónima de Burgos, whilst a desperate Cervantes
pleads with his former friend and future rival to use his charms on
Elena Osorio to intervene with her father, a theatre impresario, on his
behalf—conversations with the two protagonists and other interested
parties (e.g. Góngora, Quevedo, Jerónimo de Pasamonte) seem
primarily designed to use up much of the running time and conceal the
limitations of a period piece shot largely in interiors. Budgetary
constraints were also apparent in the adaptation of La española inglesa
with Toledo and its environs rather incongruously providing the set for
both England and Seville, the viewer (or, perhaps more accurately,
listener) also presented with an anachronistic meld of early modern
and twenty-first century Spanish. The hackneyed device of reducing
fiction to biography through the presence of an omniscient narrator
revealed at the end to be Cervantes himself does little to communicate
how and why the ‘text plays radically with notions of perspective and
interpretation’,81 with melodrama brought to the fore through the
visualization of scenes only referred to elliptically, whilst the darker
elements of the source-text are systematically eschewed as Isabella’s
ugliness is, for example, concealed in shadow and/or disguise.
If both ventures gave the impression that they were produced out of
a sense of ritualistic obligation, then centenaries more broadly can be
said to reveal as much about the society in which they take place as the
ostensible subjects of commemoration. In 2016, there was undoubtedly
a far less conducive environment for celebration than eleven years
previously. The artistic and popular success of El Ministerio del Tiempo,
alongside the wasted opportunities of 2005, nevertheless suggests that
a lack of imagination and a misplaced sense of duty constitute a more
serious obstacle than financial constraints.
Conclusion
Cinema’s origins coincide with Spain’s definitive loss of a physical
empire, whilst ‘the specular presence of Don Quixote as a national
subject’ continues to underpin the production and reception of
Cervantes screen fictions.82 Rarely left alone or offered a sufficiently
radical makeover, adaptations and appropriations have been anchored
in a diverse array of national(ist) discourses, perpetually in thrall to the
reification of textual authority. For as long as this dynamic persists,
screen iterations are as likely to dissuade as persuade potential readers
from searching out a copy of the first European novel, a vital caveat to
Matthew D. Warshawsky’s more celebratory claim that ‘the stature of
Don Quixote as a cultural icon continues to grow, particularly in Spain,
despite the fact that people interact increasingly with Don Quixote in
non-literary ways’.83
In order to illustrate his general hypothesis that ‘by breaking with
the literary rules of its age, all authentic literature presents itself or is
considered to be non-literary, and its new form as an absence of
form’,84 novelist Javier Cercas takes the Quixote as a paradigmatic case-
study:
because it belonged to an ignoble genre, the Quixote wasn’t appreciated
by his contemporaries, or it was appreciated solely as an entertaining
book, as an inconsequential best-seller. Because of this, we shouldn’t
kid ourselves: as José María Valverde said, Cervantes would never have
won the Cervantes prize.85
The screen adaptation I have seen that has come closest to replicating
effect in the viewer—or at least this viewer—is a 1957 Russian version
directed by Grigori Kozintsev. This is despite or, more likely, because of
the fact it selectively appropriated from the text and makes no attempt
to be exhaustive or to respect textual chronology. Spanish screen
fictions have, by contrast, shown disappointingly little interest or
imagination in identifying filmic means to bring the writer and his
works alive for modern-day audiences. On cinema and television, as
elsewhere, Cervantes has simply not had the opportunity to compete
with Shakespeare under equal or comparable conditions.
Acknowledgement
Professor Rob Stone from the University of Birmingham kindly read and
commented upon an earlier draft of this chapter. I am grateful for his very
constructive feedback.
Works Cited
Aguilar, Carlos. Jesús Franco (Madrid: Cátedra, 2011).
Alsedo, Quico. ‘Pistas del IV centenario’, El Mundo, 21 December 2004: p. 47.
Armero, Gonzalo. Cuatrocientos años de Don Quijote por el mundo (Madrid: TF
Editores y Sociedad Estatal de Conmemoraciones Culturales, 2005).
Arriata-Jauregi, Marcelo. ‘Una zafia ofensa a la cultura española’, Arriba, 16
August 1978.
Badcock, James. ‘Is it fair for Shakespeare to overshadow Cervantes?’, BBC News
Magazine, 18 April 2016: available at http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/
magazine-36055236. Last accessed 29 December 2016.
Bingham, Adam. ‘The romance of certain old clothes or they don’t make ’em
like that anymore: Honor de cavallería and art cinema’s last stand’, CineAction
75 (2008): pp. 34–46.
Bowskill, Sarah. ‘Politics and literary prizes: a case study of Spanish America
and the Premio Cervantes’. Hispanic Review 80, no. 2 (2012): pp. 289–311.
Boyd, Carolyn P. Historia patria: Politics, History and National Identity in Spain,
1875–1975 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997).
Boyd, Stephen. ‘Introduction’ to A Companion to Cervantes’s Novelas Ejemplares,
edited by Boyd (Woodbridge: Tamesis, 2005), pp. 1–46.
Bradshaw, Peter. ‘The Man who Killed Don Quixote review: Terry Gilliam’s epic
journey finds a joyous end’, The Guardian, 18 May 2018, available at https://
www.theguardian.com/film/2018/may/18/the-man-who-killed-don-quixote-
review-cannes-2018-terry-gilliam. Last consulted 20 March 2020.
Brady, Frank. Citizen Welles: A Biography of Orson Welles (New York: Charles
Scribner’s Sons, 1989).
Carmona, Alba. ‘Ausencias y presencias: la recepción de Lope y Shakespeare a
través del cine’. Anuario Lope de Vega 23 (2017): pp. 286–317.
Cascajosa 
Virino, 
Concepción. 
‘«Somos 
españoles, 
improvisen». 
Una
introducción’. In Dentro de El Ministerio de Tiempo, edited by Cascajosa Virino
(Madrid, Léeme Libros, 2015), pp. ix–xv.
Cascardi, Anthony J. ‘Consequences of Don Quixote: the bearable lightness of
Cervantes’s influence’. In A History of the Spanish Novel, edited by J.A. Garrido
Ardilla (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015), pp. 122–41.
Castro de Paz, José Luis. ‘Realismos, grabados a…‘una espesa cortina de
incienso’: apropósito de Don Quijote de la Mancha (Rafael Gil, 1947/1948)’. In
Espejos entre ficciones: el cine y el Quijote, edited by Carlos F. Heredero
(Madrid: Sociedad Estatal de Conmemoraciones Culturales, 2009), pp. 189–
99.
Cercas, Javier. El punto ciego (Barcelona: Penguin Random House, 2016).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Don Quixote, translated by James H.
Montgomery (Indianapolis: Hackett Publishers, 2006).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. El ingenioso hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha,
vol. I, edited by John Jay Allen (Madrid: Cátedra, 2000).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. El ingenioso hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha,
vol. II, edited by Luis Andrés Murillo (Madrid: Castalia, 1991).
Cervera, Elena and Cristina Iriarte (eds). Don Quijote y el cine (Madrid: Sociedad
Estatal de Conmemoraciones Culturales and Filmoteca Española, 2005).
Close, Anthony. A Companion to Don Quixote (Woodbridge: Tamesis, 2008).
Cobos, Juan, Miguel Rubio and José Antonio Pruneda. ‘Don Quijote’. In
Cervantes en imágenes: donde se cuenta cómo el cine y la televisión evocaron su
vida y su obra, edited by Emilio de la Rosa, Luis M. González, and Pedro
Medina (Alcalá de Henares: Festival de cine de Alcalá de Henares, 1998), pp.
383–5.
Concannon, Philip. ‘I hate making movies!’. Sight & Sound, February 2020: pp.
52–5.
Delgado, Pedro Eugenio. ‘Animando a Don Quijote’. In El Quijote en el cine,
edited by Miguel Juan Payán (Madrid: Ediciones Jaguar, 2005), pp. 131–4.
Dennison, Stephanie. ‘National, transnational, and post-national: issues in
contemporary filmmaking in the Hispanic world’. In Contemporary Hispanic
Cinema: Interrogating the Transnational in Spanish and Latin American Film,
edited by Stephanie Dennison (Woodbridge: Tamesis, 2013), pp. 1–24.
Donnell, Sidney. ‘Quixotic storytelling, Lost in La Mancha, and the unmaking of
The Man who Killed Don Quixote’, Romance Quarterly 53, no. 2 (2006): pp. 92–
112.
Durán, Manuel. ‘Cervantes’s harassed and vagabond life’. In Cervantes’s Don
Quixote: A Casebook, edited by Roberto González Echevarría (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2005), pp. 23–34.
Egginton, William. The Man Who Invented Fiction: How Cervantes Ushered in the
Modern World (London: Bloomsbury, 2016).
España, Rafael de. De La Mancha a la pantalla: aventuras cinematográficas del
ingenioso hidalgo (Barcelona: Publicaciones Ediciones de la Universitat de
Barcelona, 2007).
Fanés, Felix. CIFESA, la antorcha de los éxitos (Valencia: Institución Alfonso el
Magnánimo, 1982).
Faulkner, Sally. A History of Spanish Film (London: Bloomsbury, 2013).
Fuchs, Barbara. ‘Golden Ages and Golden hinds; or, periodizing Spain and
England’. PMLA 127, no. 2 (2012): pp. 321–7.
Garcés, María Antonia. Cervantes en Argel: historia de un cautivo (Madrid: Gredos,
2005).
García Rayo, Antonio and José María Paz Gago. Don Quijote en la pantalla
(Madrid: Comunidad de Madrid and Comisario del IV Centenaria de la
Publicación, 2005).
González González, Irene. ‘La «hermandad hispano-árabe» en la política cultural
del franquismo (1936–1956)’. Anales de historia contemporánea 23 (2007): pp.
183–197.
Gracia, Jordi. Miguel de Cervantes: la conquista de la ironía (Barcelona: Taurus,
2016).
Henry, Melanie. The Signifying Self: Cervantine Drama as Counter-Perspective
Aesthetic (Cambridge: Modern Humanities Research Association, 2015).
Heredero, Carlos F. ‘Don Quijote en la pantalla (diálogos entre la literatura y el
cine)’. In Don Quijote y el cine, edited by Elena Cervera and Ana Cristina
Iriarte (Madrid: Sociedad Estatal de Conmoraciones Culturales y Filmoteca
Española, 2005), pp. 21–97.
Heredero, Carlos F. (ed.). Espejos entre ficciones: el cine y el Quijote (Madrid:
Sociedad Estatal de Conmemoraciones Culturales, 2009).
Ife, Barry W. ‘Herodotus and the Eternal Rriangle: Another Look at the Sources
of El curioso impertinente’. Bulletin of Hispanic Studies 82, no. 5 (2005): pp.
671–83.
Ife, Barry W. ‘The Historical and Social Context’. In The Cambridge Companion to
Cervantes, edited by Anthony J. Cascardi (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2002), pp. 11–31.
James, Nick. ‘Passive aggressive’. Sight & Sound, April 2010: p. 5.
Kercher, Dona M. ‘Looking for Don Quijote’s own shadow: an interview with
Manuel Gutiérrez Aragón about his film El caballero Don Quijote (2002)’.
Arizona Journal of Hispanic Cultural Studies 6 (2002): pp. 129–40.
Kercher, Dona M. ‘The marketing of Cervantine magic for a new global image of
Spain’. In Refiguring Spain: Cinema/Media/Representation, edited by Marsha
Kinder (Durham: Duke University Press, 1997), pp. 99–132.
Labrador Méndez, Germán. ‘Dynamiting Don Quijote: literature, colonial
memory and the crisis of the national subject in the monumental poetics of
the Cervantine tercentenary (Spain 1915–1921)’. Journal of Iberian and Latin
American Studies 19, no. 3 (2013): pp. 185–209.
Macia Serrano, Antonio. ‘Cervantes y las ordenanzas’. La Legión: revista
legionaria, April 1964: p. 31.
Maddox, Richard. The Best of all Possible Islands: Seville’s Universal Exposition, the
New Spain and the New Europe (Albany: State University of New York Press,
2004).
Mariscal, George. ‘The crisis of Hispanism as apocalyptic myth’. In Cervantes and
his Postmodern Constituencies, edited by Anne J. Cruz and Carroll B. Johnson
(New York: Garland Publishing, 1999), pp. 201–16.
Martín Patino, Basilio. ‘Dos experiencias cervantinas’. In Cervantes en imágenes:
donde se cuenta cómo el cine y la televisión evocaron su vida y su obra, edited by
Emilio de la Rosa, Luis M. González, and Pedro Medina (Alcalá de Henares:
Festival de cine de Alcalá de Henares, 1998), pp. 275–85.
Martínez, Miguel. Front Lines: Soldiers’ Writing in the Early Modern Hispanic
Period (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2016).
Martínez Tórtula, Esther. La enseñanza de la historia en el primer bachillerato
franquista (1938–1953) (Madrid: Editorial Tecnos, 1996).
McBride, Joseph. What Ever Happened to Orson Welles: A Portrait of an
Independent Career (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 2006).
Minder, Raphael. ‘Cervantes not getting 400th due, some say’, The New York
Times, 24 April 2016: p. 4.
Ministerio de Cultura. Don Quijote y el cine (Madrid and Valencia: Ministerio de
Cultura and Generalitat Valenciana, 2005).
Moral, Javier. ‘Behind the enigma construct: a certain trend in Spanish cinema’.
In (Re)Viewing Creative, Critical and Commercial Practices in Contemporary
Spanish Cinema, edited by Duncan Wheeler and Fernando Canet (Bristol:
Intellect, 2014), pp. 93–104.
Naremore, James. The Magic World of Orson Welles, 2nd edn (Dallas: First
Southern Methodist Press, 1989).
Ocaña, Javier. ‘“Mister” Gilliam de la Mancha’, El País, 1 June 2018, available
at 
https://elpais.com/cultura/2018/05/30/
actualidad/1527693148_434263.html. Last consulted 20 March 2020.
Palacio, Manuel. ‘Cervantes en zapatillas y en el castillo familiar’. In Cervantes
en imágenes: donde se cuenta cómo el cine y la televisión evocaron su vida y su
obra, edited by Emilio de la Rosa, Luis M. González, and Pedro Medina
(Alcalá de Henares: Festival de cine de Alcalá de Henares, 1998), pp. 121–38.
Palacio, Manuel. La televisión durante la Transición española (Madrid: Cátedra,
2012).
Payán, Miguel Juan (ed.). El Quijote en el cine (Madrid: Ediciones Jaguar, 2005).
Pérez Perucha, Julio. ‘A la sombra del Quijote’. In Cervantes en imágenes: donde
se cuenta cómo el cine y la televisión evocaron su vida y su obra, edited by Emilio
de la Rosa, Luis M. González, and Pedro Medina (Alcalá de Henares: Festival
de cine de Alcalá de Henares, 1998), pp. 67–77.
Perriam, Chris. ‘Extreme rambling and the slow Quixote: Albert Serra’s Honor de
cavalleria (2006)’, Unpublished conference paper at Cervantes Reborn:
Textual Reception and Authorial Resurrection Symposium, University of
Manchester, 27 September 2016.
Pollard, Alexandra. ‘Terry Gilliam: “I’m tired of white men being blamed for
everything wrong with the world’, The Independent, 4 January 2020: available
at 
https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/features/terry-
gilliam-interview-harvey-weinstein-victims-metoo-race-a9269136.html. 
Last
consulted on 20 March 2020.
Quaggio, Giulia. ‘1992: La modernidad del pasado. El PSOE en busca de una
idea regenerada de España’. Historia y Política 35 (2016): pp. 95–122.
Riambau, Esteve. ‘Welles y Cervantes: una aventura quijotesca’. In Cervantes en
imágenes: donde se cuenta cómo el cine y la televisión evocaron su vida y su obra,
edited by Emilio de la Rosa, Luis M. González, and Pedro Medina (Alcalá de
Henares: Festival de cine de Alcalá de Henares, 1998), pp. 365–82.
Richards, Michael. ‘Constructing the Nationalist State: Self-Sufficiency and
Regeneration in the Early Franco Years’. In Nationalism and Nation in the
Iberian Peninsula: Competing and Conflicting Identities, edited by Clare Mar-
Molinero and Ángel Smith (Oxford: Berg, 1996), pp. 149–67.
Riley, E.C. ‘Literature and life in Don Quixote’. In Cervantes’s Don Quixote: A
Casebook, edited by Roberto González Echevarría (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2006), pp. 125–40.
Rosa, Emilio de la, Luis M. González, and Pedro Medina (eds). Cervantes en
imágenes: donde se cuenta cómo el cine y la televisión evocaron su vida y su obra
(Alcalá de Henares: Festival de cine de Alcalá de Henares, 1998).
Rosenbaum, Jonathan. ‘Cuándo y cómo podemos terminar el Don Quixote de
Orson Welles’. In Espejos entre ficciones: el cine y el Quijote, edited by Carlos F.
Heredero (Madrid: Sociedad Estatal de Conmemoraciones Culturales, 2009),
pp. 235–44.
Rueda Laffond, José Carlos, and Carlota Coronado Ruiz. ‘Historical Science
Fiction: From Television Memory to Transmedia Memory in El Ministerio del
Tiempo’. Journal of Spanish Cultural Studies 17, no. 1 (2016): pp. 87–101.
Santos, Antonio. El sueño imposible: aventuras cinematográficas de Don Quijote y
Sancho (Santander: Fundación Marcelino Botín, 2006).
Sorlin, Pierre. ‘How to look at an “historical” film’. In The Historical Film: History
and Memory in Media, edited by Marcía Landy (London: The Athlone Press,
2001), pp. 25–49.
Spanish Diplomatic Information Office. The Spanish Cinema (Madrid: Diplomatic
Information Office, 1949).
Stainton, Audrey. ‘Don Quixote: Orson Welles’s secret’. Sight & Sound 57, no. 4
(1988): pp. 252–61.
Stam, Robert. Reflexivity in Film and Literature: From Don Quixote to Jean-Luc
Godard (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1985).
Torres, Isabel. ‘Now you see it, now you…see it again? The Dynamics of
Doubling in La española inglesa’. In A Companion to Cervantes’s Novelas
Ejemplares, edited by Stephen Boyd (Woodbridge: Tamesis, 2005), pp. 115–
33.
Valls, Fernando. La enseñanza de la literatura en el franquismo (1936–1951)
(Madrid: Antoni Bosch, 1983).
Vilches, Ángel. ‘El Quijote no puede verse de una o de otra forma, sino solo
como lo escribió’, Radiocinema: revista cinematográfica española, 1 October
1947: no pages.
Warshawsky, Matthew D. ‘Preface’ in Don Quixote: Interdisciplinary Connections,
edited by Warshawsky and James A. Parr (Newark, DE: Juan de la Cuesta,
2013), pp. 9–13.
Wheeler, Duncan. ‘Back to the Future: Repackaging Spain’s Troublesome Past
for Local and Global Audiences’. In (Re)Viewing Creative, Critical and
Commercial Practices in Contemporary Spanish Cinema, edited by Wheeler and
Fernando Canet (Bristol: Intellect, 2014), pp. 205–33.
Wheeler, Duncan. ‘Contextualising and Contesting José Antonio Maravall’s
Theories of Baroque Culture from the Perspective of Modern-Day
Performance’. Bulletin of the Comediantes 65, no. 1 (2013): pp. 15–43.
Wheeler, Duncan. Golden Age Drama in Contemporary Spain: The Comedia on
Page, Stage and Screen (Cardiff: University of Wales Press, 2012).
Wheeler, Duncan. ‘¿La película duende?: María Teresa León, Rafael Alberti, and
Alternative Traditions of Resurrecting Golden Age Drama’. In Stages of Exile,
edited by Helena Buffery (Bern: Peter Lang, 2011), pp. 71–93.
Williamson, Edwin. ‘The Power-Struggle between Don Quixote and Sancho:
Four Crises in the Development of the Narrative’. Bulletin of Spanish Studies
84, no. 7 (2007): pp. 837–58.
Zunzunegui, Santos. ‘La ruta de Don Quijote’. In Espejos entre ficciones: el cine y
el Quijote, edited by Carlos F. Heredero (Madrid: Sociedad Estatal de
Conmemoraciones Culturales, 2009), pp. 181–87.
Zunzunegui, Santos. Orson Welles (Madrid: Cátedra, 2005).
1 Badcock, available at http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-36055236.
2 Alba Carmona has produced the most accurate and detailed comparison of
film adaptations of Spanish and English literary giants. Although her primary
focus is on Lope de Vega, she has also traced the frequency with which
Cervantes has been adapted for the cinema and television over different periods
since the beginning of the twentieth century (p. 412).
3 Fuchs, p. 324.
4 Labrador Méndez, p. 194.
5 Labrador Méndez, p. 192.
6 See, for example, Armero; Cervera y Iriarte; García Rayo and Paz Gago;
España; Heredero, Espejos; Ministerio de Cultura; Payán; Rosa, González, and
Medina; Santos.
7 Stam, p. 210. This can, for example, be seen in the following speech
delivered by Don Quixote to his squire:
Sancho amigo, has de saber que yo nací, por querer del cielo, en esta
nuestra edad de hierro, para resucitar en ella la de oro, o la dorada, como
suele llamarse. Yo soy aquel para quien están guardados los peligros, las
grandes hazañas, los valerosos hechos. Yo soy, digo otra vez, quien ha de
resucitar los de la Tabla Redonda, los Doce de Francia y los Nueve de la
Fama, y el que ha de poner en olvido los Platires, los Tablantes, Olivantes
y Tirantes, los Febeos y Belianises, con toda la canterva de los famosos
caballeros andantes del pasado tiempo, haciendo en este en que me hallo
tales grandezas, extrañezas y fechos de armas, que escurezcan las más
claras que ellos ficieron (Cervantes, El ingenioso hidalgo…, p. 246).
[Sancho, my friend, I would have you know that I am was born by
heaven’s decree into this iron age of ours to revive the age of gold,
commonly known as the Golden Age. I am the one for whom are reserved
perils, great accomplishments, and valiant deeds. I am, I say again, the
one destined to resurrect the Knights of the Round Table, the Twelve
Peers of France, and the Nine Worthies—the one who will consign to
oblivion the Platires, and Tablantes, the Olivantes and Tirantes, the Febos
and Belianises, and that whole horde of famous knights-errant of ages past
by performing in the present age in which I find myself such prodigious
deeds, wonders and feats of arms that they will eclipse the most brilliant
ones ever performed by them] (Cervantes, Don Quixote, p. 126).
8 Stam, p. 2.
9 Stam, p. 209.
10 Martínez Tórtula, p. 173.
11 Boyd, Carolyn p. 240.
12 Valls, p. 149; all translations into English are by the author of this chapter
unless otherwise noted.
13 Fanés, p. 164.
14 Fanés, p. 183.
15 Spanish Diplomatic Office, p. 15.
16 Spanish Diplomatic Office, p. 14.
17 See Wheeler, ‘¿La película duende…’; and Golden Age Drama…, pp. 17–27.
18 Cited in Vilches, n.p.
19 Cascardi, p. 123.
20 Riley, p. 129.
21 Sorlin, p. 27.
22 Castro de Paz, p. 199.
23 See Zunzunegui, ‘La ruta…’.
24 Richards, p. 163.
25 Close, p. 28.
26 Heredero, ‘Don Quijote…’, p. 73.
27 Ife, ‘The historical…’, p. 11.
28 Boyd, Stephen p. 43.
29 Gracia, p. 15.
30 Egginton, p. 186.
31 Garcés, p. 28.
32 Macia Serrano, p. 31.
33 See Wheeler, ‘Contextualising and contesting…’.
34 Durán, p. 31.
35 Martínez, p. 5
36 Mariscal, p. 206.
37 In relation to this question, Jordi Gracia notes the temptation to assume
that this may have been due to a Moorish woman who fell in love with him or
as a result of Hassan’s documented bisexuality (p. 68). William Egginton
speculates that ‘Hasan Pasha could not but have been struck by the audacity
and valor of this crippled but handsome man with the piercing eyes, hooked
nose, and light brown beard’ (p. 74); but mixes historical and literary evidence
to conclude it unlikely they had a homosexual relationship as Cervantes did not
resemble the kind of lover Hassan was accustomed to and the author’s work
revealed ‘nothing but scorn for prisoners who gave in to the temptations of
either sex or apostasy to get for themselves a better life’ (p. 74).
38 Figures courtesy of the Spanish Filmoteca’s database. See http://
www.mcu.es/bbddpeliculas/cargarFiltro.do?
layout=bbddpeliculas&cache=init&language=es. All other figures in this
chapter are taken from this database.
39 See Ife, ‘Herodotus…’.
40 The Filmoteca in Madrid contains fragments of a silent Spanish film
version of La ilustre fregona (Armando Pou, 1927); the extant footage suggesting
a dual focus of female beauty and male valour through physically expressive
sword-play. La gitanilla (Fernando Delgado, 1940) and El curioso impertinente
(Flavio Calzavara, 1953) have, unfortunately, possibly been lost forever. See
Pérez Perucha, pp. 70–3.
41 Martín Patino, p. 283.
42 Cervantes, El ingenioso hidalgo…, II p. 110; Don Quixote, p. 462.
43 Arriata-Jauregi
44 Bowskill, p. 292.
45 Delgado, p. 132.
46 See González González.
47 Palacio, La televisión…, p. 331.
48 Palacio, La televisión…, p. 333.
49 Palacio, La televisión…, p. 332.
50 See Faulkner, pp. 159–96.
51 Quaggio, p. 102.
52 Quaggio, p. 112.
53 Maddox, p. 64.
54 Dennison, p. 6.
55 Naremore, p. xiii. For more information on Welles’s repeated attempt to
make this film, see Brady, pp. 490–3; McBride, pp. 237–42; Riambau; Stainton;
and Zunzunegui, Orson Welles, pp. 316–32.
56 Stainton, p. 253.
57 Cited in Cobos, Rubio, and Pruneda, p. 383.
58 For a solid overview of the film and its (un)making, see Donnell.
59 For an account of the shooting of the film, see Concannon.
60 See, for example, Bradshaw; and Ocaña.
61 Gilliam cited in Pollard.
62 McBride, p. 238.
63 McBride, p. 240.
64 Rosenbaum, p. 243. The best case a very charitable biography of Jesús
Franco could make for this film was the following: ‘despite it being
disappointing, this film/non-film is of cinephilic interest, both for providing a
glimpse at the masterpiece that might have been and also for offering a
phantasmagoric assemblance of a no-less quimerical film’ (Aguilar, pp. 299–
300).
65 Available at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S4GtxJC6D1U. Last
accessed on 28 December 2016. I was made aware of this footage by Rob
Stone’s lecture at the British Library.
66 Riambau, p. 382.
67 Palacio, ‘Cervantes en zapatillas…’, p. 135.
68 Kercher, ‘Looking…’, pp. 103–21.
69 Kercher, ‘The marketing of…’, p. 123. Although not devoid of merit, the
Emmy-nominated television film Don Quixote (Peter Yates, 2000), in my
opinion, did a better job than the Spanish production of combining profit with
pleasure. Bob Hoskins excels as Sancho in an adaption of the two parts
(although two hours are dedicated to Part I and only around half an hour to
Part II centred in the Duke and Duchess’s palace), with special effects which
allow us to see reality as viewed through the eyes of both Don Quixote and the
other characters used humorously at the inn and impressively for when he tilts
at windmills.
70 Williamson, p. 846.
71 Gutiérrez Aragón cited in Kercher, ‘Looking…’, p. 131.
72 Cited in Alsedo, p. 47.
73 Moral, pp. 96–7.
74 I am grateful to Chris Perriam for generously sending me the Power Point
for a conference paper he delivered on the film.
75 James, p. 5.
76 Bingham, p. 39.
77 Henry, pp. 5–6.
78 See Minder.
79 See Wheeler, ‘Back to the Future…’.
80 ‘The Ministry of Time had filtered into daily conversation and was a point
of reference for us coming to terms with our cultural heritage and past. There
were some curious participants in this conversation, from politicians who let
their followers on Twitter know they had they had certificates verifying their
status as fans of the programme (ministéricos) to community managers of
institutions such as the National Library, the portal of Spanish Archives or the
Museum of Romanticism, which, according to the design of each episodes have
offered materials from their collections’ (Cascajosa Virino, p. xii).
For a solid English-language overview of the series, see Rueda Laffond and
Coronado Ruiz.
81 Torres, p. 132.
82 Labrador Méndez, p. 188.
83 Warshawsky, p. 11.
84 Cercas, pp. 35–6.
85 Cercas, p. 25.
Chapter 30
Cervantine Criticism until 1999
R.J. Oakley
University of Birmingham
Harold Bloom informs us in his The Western Canon that as we writers
and littérateurs walk the literary road, two figures are unfailingly out
ahead of us all, and they are Shakespeare and Cervantes. Yet the latter,
in his time, was so pitifully, tragically, behind. Few writers among the
supreme literary creators of all time can have had such a late start. I
have just used the word ‘tragic’. Perhaps tragicomic is better. The
extraordinary ups and downs of Cervantes’s life, related and discussed
at length elsewhere in this volume, make up a tragicomic drama that,
to say the least, was improbable. On his return from captivity in 1580,
Cervantes was thirty-three years old, and all he had to show for fifteen
of his best years, at least from the literary historian’s point of view,
were a few occasional poems. Cervantes was to spend the rest of his
days catching up. This much has to be said despite what he claims to
have written during those years for the theatre—activity probably
intense as well as prolific. As far as we know, he published no plays in
those early years but in 1585 he was able to publish his pastoral
romance, La Galatea. Since our guide in this chapter is the published
work, when it was received by the public and how it was received, we
are obliged to declare that in the year 1585 Cervantes began his
published work in earnest with the pastoral.
An anecdotal event connected to the pastoral is most relevant here.
The event, if true, took place in 1602 and provides us with an easy
answer to the question as to why Cervantes turned so promptly to the
pastoral after returning from Algiers. The model for Jorge de
Montemayor’s (?1520–61) heroine of Los siete libros de la Diana [The
Seven Books of the Diana], published in 1559, was still alive. Philip III
was travelling in her locality, and learning that the lady was living in
retirement in León, had sufficient interest in the book to order a
meeting with her. This gives some idea of the extent to which Diana
had become the best-seller of the age. Indeed, by the 1560s and 1570s
the pastoral had replaced the books of chivalry as the most popular
form of prose fiction of the day. Whereas the books of chivalry were
concerned with love and combat, the pastoral novels were concerned
with love and nature. Their appeal lay in portraying an idealized
human love moving within an idealized landscape. In 1578, the work
that had inspired them all, the Arcadia of Jacobo Sannazaro (1458–
1530) was into its third edition in Spanish translation. By the year in
which Cervantes published his Galatea (1585) Montemayor’s Diana had
already gone through twenty-four editions.
On his return to Spain, was Cervantes being simply hard-headed in
trying his hand at a pastoral novel? Or was his retreat into the pastoral
entirely understandable after his sufferings of the previous five years?
Melveena McKendrick thinks that ‘it was in a way perhaps a necessary
exorcism of the past’.1 Whatever the truth of the matter, one form of
escapist literature had replaced another. Moreover, as Jean Canavaggio
has observed, the ‘undeniably secular roots of the pastoral novel…call
down the fulminations of high-minded moralists’.2 Such a diatribe was
composed by Pedro Malón de Chaide (1530–89), Augustinian friar,
writing in his La Conversión de la Magdalena [The Conversion of Mary
Magdalen]. The fact that Malón’s book was published in the same year
as La Galatea is only one of its ironies, another being that it served as
inspiration for Mateo Alemán (1547–1615?). For the author of Guzmán
de Alfarache, a picaresque novel could hardly be termed an escape.
Very little of the critical response across the centuries listed in our
bibliography would indicate that a pastoral novel was simply an
escape. Indeed, López Estrada and López García-Berdoy make a
convincing case for the pastoral novel as a genuine intellectual riposte
to the book of chivalry portrayed in Don Quixote as an inferior form.3
They draw attention to the priest’s verdict during the scrutiny of Don
Quixote’s library at the close of his first sally in I.6. The pastoral novels
in the library should be spared, declares the priest, because they are
‘libros de entendimiento’ [‘intelligent books’].4 This is another way of
saying that La Galatea and its two important Spanish predecessors,
Diana and its continuation by Gil Polo (?1530–91), have significant
similarities. All three are steeped in Petrarch (1304–74), Garcilaso
(1501–36), and the Latin poets of antiquity. Cervantes is the one to
demonstrate, as readers of Don Quixote would expect, a passionate
devotion to Garcilaso. Solé-Leris and Canavaggio both make a strong
case for seeing Cervantes as a serious pastoral writer. Canavaggio adds
some thought-provoking pages locating the pastoral novel in a socio-
political setting in which its success becomes inevitable.5
Joaquín Casalduero’s essay in that august and magisterial collection
of essays titled Suma Cervantina [A Cervantine Compendium] points out a
series of comparisons and contrasts between Diana and La Galatea:
‘Cervantes does not like figures clearly etched as in the Renaissance.…
He gives us the working through of the stories, the formation of the
characters.’6 The handling of characters is already sure; so is the
narrative. There is a concerted attempt to link all the stories. Love and
friendship are already two main themes for Cervantes. The tale of two
friends, in this case Timbrio and Silerio, is with us already; and here we
see its happy face. However, Cervantes appears to be mounting an
attack on Diana and the pastoral attitude to love. For Casalduero,
Cervantes sees romance between man and woman ‘as a conflict…that
much of the time can show, instead of peace and harmony, the tragic
side of human relationships’.7 This aspect of Cervantes’s pastoral novel
has been noted by James Stamm8 and Bruno Damiani. The latter’s essay
on one form of rhetoric in La Galatea is a survey of the theme of death
qua rhetoric, which climaxes in the ‘death speech’ that has an
increasing presence in La Galatea as the narrative advances.9 Timbrio
and Silerio are noble of action but many other characters are not. This
is no novela amena (nice story). It begins in medias res with a shepherd’s
love-song. There is violence; there is cruelty; there is indifference. La
Galatea is allowed to express beauty, but it must also be real. Cervantes
is already addressing the problematics of verisimilitude.
After the publication of La Galatea, Cervantes shows us no sign of
being in a hurry. Full twenty years passed by before Don Quixote, Part I
made its tardy appearance in 1605. Slow to appear, its success was
phenomenal. The popularity of Don Quixote, so extraordinarily constant
across the centuries, has outshone that of its creator, and this is despite
the fact that signs of Cervantes’s genius extend far beyond the pages of
his great novel. Whenever Cervantes and the rest of his works have
almost disappeared from view, Don Quixote has gone on leading a life
of its own from century to century, or even as little as from decade to
decade. No critical biography could possibly cope with the multitude of
responses that Don Quixote has elicited. The most searching analysis in
modern times of any of the approaches taken to the novel remains
Anthony Close’s monumental doctoral study of the romantic Don
Quixote. In the course of his survey, Close emerges as fiercely partisan,
arguing passionately against the romantic response to Don Quixote: but
in the process, he does us all an immense service. The Romantic
Approach to Don Quixote (1978) is so thorough, so all-embracing, that
the result is an exercise in reader-response charting in detail virtually
every approach to Don Quixote that there has ever been, from
Cervantes’s own lifetime until the death of Américo Castro in 1972.
Before romanticism caught up with Don Quixote at the beginning of
the nineteenth century, the novel’s impact on English prose fiction, for
example, had already been considerable. It is interesting to note that
the first annotated Don Quixote was produced by the English Hispanist
John Bowle in 1781. Perhaps urged on by the number of Shakespeare
editions appearing at the time, Bowle, writing in Spanish, helped to
raise the status of Cervantes as a writer in Spain as well as in England.
His Don Quixote became an important source and inspiration for later
Spanish editors such as Pellicer and Clemencín. From the time of Don
Quixote’s early editors and commentators until c.1800 the book was
regarded as essentially burlesque. But what burlesque? In the prologue
to his novel Joseph Andrews (1742) Henry Fielding (1707–54), among
novelists probably Cervantes’s greatest direct disciple, describes
adroitly his sophisticated version of burlesque narrative. In point of
fact, Fielding’s view of burlesque is arguably a good deal more nuanced
than Close would lead us to suppose:
Now, a comic romance is a comic epic poem in prose; differing from
comedy, as a serious epic from tragedy: its action being more extended
and comprehensive; containing a much larger circle of incidents, and
introducing a greater variety of characters. It differs from the serious
romance in its fable and action, in this; that as in the one these are
grave and solemn, so in the other they are light and ridiculous: it differs
in its characters by introducing persons of inferior rank, and
consequently, of inferior manners, whereas the grave romance sets the
highest before us: lastly, in its sentiments and diction; by preserving the
ludicrous instead of the sublime. In the diction, I think, burlesque itself
may be sometimes admitted; of which many instances will occur in this
work, as in the descriptions of the battles, and some other places, not to
be pointed out to the classical reader, for whose entertainment these
parodies or burlesque imitations are chiefly calculated.10
Fielding has clearly understood the concept of what an epic in prose
might signify. He has also appreciated the possible role of comedy
therein, a topic taken up by A.A. Parker, Ciriaco Morón, and others.
Romanticism, however, rediscovered Don Quixote as a philosophical
narrative portraying a tragic hero battling in the midst of an ongoing
cosmic struggle between the real and the ideal. The age demanded such
a conflict and sought out appropriate literary heroes, national and
international, that could be enlisted in the fight: Wilhelm Meister,
Hamlet, Don Juan, Don Álvaro. As the nineteenth century wore on,
what Close calls a ‘spirit of casticismo’ grew ever stronger. Casticismo is
defined as ‘the idealization of cultural caste-purity’.11 This form of
nationalism runs right through nineteenth-century Spanish literary
scholarship. Spanish culture with Don Quixote as its flagship was being
asked to save the nation languishing in deepest decline. Would a
clarion call in the direction of Spain’s former literary greatness be
enough to effectively recuperate the intellectual health and the high
culture of the nation 300 years on? At the same time Cervantine studies
were becoming notably biographical. Did Don Quixote caricature the
Duke of Lerma or even Philip II? Did Cervantes ridicule the Inquisition?
We are now in a world of allegorical satire. Was Don Quixote a satire on
the decadence of Spain? The Generation of ’98 seems to have thought
so.
In 1895 the writer and scholar Miguel de Unamuno published his
collection of essays, En torno al casticismo [Concerning Cultural Caste-
purity] in which he revealed himself to be passionately concerned with
Spain’s great literature and its role within the nation’s collective
psyche. Unamuno attacks all those who have wanted to idealize caste-
pure institutions. For the author of Vida de Don Quijote y Sancho [Life of
Don Quixote and Sancho], Don Quixote was the only work in the
Cervantine corpus that really mattered. Only Don Quixote had the
prestige, the artistic and intellectual strength to perform the task.
Unamuno’s solution was to fashion a ‘renewal’ of Don Quixote. New
readers of Cervantes might be dismayed to learn that this meant
nothing less than a re-write of the great novel. Unamuno endeavours to
describe Don Quixote’s character as well as creating a parody of his
madness. This turns into a version of Unamuno’s basic philosophy: a
yearning for immortality.
Anyone looking for a critical antidote to this degree of feverish
excitement in the world of Spanish academic letters can find it in
Marcelino Menéndez y Pelayo (1856–1912) and his most distinguished
and 
direct 
disciple 
Ramón 
Menéndez 
Pidal 
(1869–1968). 
A
representative example would be Menéndez Pidal’s 1940 essay De
Cervantes y Lope de Vega [Of Cervantes and Lope de Vega] in the first part
of which he advances El entremés de los romances [The Interlude of the
Ballads] as a crucial foundation on which the Quixote may well have
been constructed. Close describes in the last part of his book ways in
which the romantic Don Quixote proceeds to coexist uneasily with
nineteenth-century positivist as well as other more recent approaches:
the common-sense impressionism of Azorín, the stylistics and
perspectivism of Alonso, Spitzer, Vossler, and Hatzfeld, and the
comparative and existential study of Don Quixote through Lukács,
Girard, then later Américo Castro, Avalle-Arce, Durán, Rosales, and
many more. Unamuno’s Vida de Don Quijote y Sancho is the climax of
the romantic Don Quixote while much writing on the novel by
Madariaga, Ortega y Gasset, Castro, and Casalduero, to name the most
famous and most distinguished during the first half of the twentieth
century, rests on Unamuno’s book which is the work of a critic who
was first and foremost, a creative artist, and only secondarily, a reader
with philosophical ambitions. He was not a philosopher. José Ortega y
Gasset’s Meditaciones del Qujote [Meditations on the Quixote] published
in 1914, however, is the work of a professional philosopher. Could such
a one, an authentic philosopher, do better? Does such a one necessarily
carry us further in our attempt to embrace with authority the totality of
Cervantes’s achievement in Don Quixote? Was such a task beyond the
capacity of any mere literary historian? Even a most careful reading of
Meditaciones del Quijote and Américo Castro’s El Pensamiento de
Cervantes [The Way Cervantes Thinks] (1925) will merely enable today’s
reader to assess the importance of Ortega and Castro (Ortega’s most
distinguished direct disciple) in shaping the latest state of play, by
which we mean, where stand Don Quixote studies in the second half of
the twentieth century and beyond?
In his introduction to the 1957 edition of Meditaciones, Ortega’s
philosophical disciple Julián Marías declares that very few people to
date have understood Meditaciones. He maintains the importance of Don
Quixote in a context in which the philosopher is caught between the
real and the ideal. Ortega’s disciple assures us that a radical
comprehension of Cervantes and his book can only be ‘fully real and
intelligible through philosophy’.12 From the outset, José Ortega y
Gasset (1883–1955) saw himself as wrestling with the problem of
Spain’s destiny which he felt to be one that thinking Spaniards were
obliged as they read Don Quixote. Ortega’s meditations begin in the
forest of Herrería close to the palace of the Escorial. The forest is a
symbol of reality like the plain of Montiel where Don Quixote does
battle with the windmills.
Ortega declares gnomically Don Quixote to be a mistake and yet at
the same time to be as well the first of all novels in time and in
importance. But then he poses a blunt question: what is a novel? His
solution is to say that it is the genre that replaced traditional epic
because it looked forward while the latter did not. No longer is the
matter in hand some idealized past. The destiny of the novel was to be
the opposite of the epic; its concern, the present:
This literature of the imagination will help maintain the beneficent
sway of the epic over humanity until the end of time. After all, the epic
was its mother.…Where there are gods there is a dynasty beneath
which the impossible becomes possible. Wherever they reign normality
does not exist. An all pervasive disorder emanates from their throne.
Their sworn constitution contains but a single article: adventure is
allowed.13
Ortega’s example is Don Quixote’s reaction to Master Peter’s puppet
show in II.25–6. For Ortega this is ‘a sort of hallucination in which we
take the adventure for an instant as though it were pure reality’.14 Don
Quixote, who is real, wants epic adventure in his reality. This will to
adventure is his drama but it is hardly epic. Achilles performs his
allotted part in the epic of which he is the tragic hero, whereas the
hero of today simply desires to act out what he considers, erroneously,
to be a role in a story in which he has no place. This will to adventure
is Don Quixote’s tragic theme. The hero has to will his tragic destiny: ‘In
wanting to be what one is not there is but a short distance between the
sublime and the ridiculous.’15 This is the conclusion reached by
Flaubert (1821–80) in his novel Madame Bovary and by Jules de
Gaultier (1858–1942), the man who invented the theory of Bovarism
out of Flaubert’s novel. Ortega calls Emma Bovary a Don Quixote in
skirts. Like him, she is an ideal example of Gaultier’s formula in that
her extreme energy not only forces her to conceive herself other than
what she is, but also to try to transform those around her to suit the
illusory world she has created.16 And so we complete a circle that we
began when describing Fielding’s view of the ridiculous as just one
ingredient towards the making of a burlesque prose epic. Are Ortega
and Close more in harmony than the distinguished Cambridge scholar
supposed?
Américo Castro (1885–1972) was drawn to Ortega’s tendency to see
the writer as faced with choices out of which will emerge a principal
theme of his work. The critical reader will follow the theme and thus
use it to define the writer’s ‘style’, one that is capable of withstanding
any social, political or aesthetic influence that might be brought to bear
upon the individual writer. The artistic and intellectual heroes of the
nation are those who resist such influence. Castro’s classic article
(1916) considered two contrasting views of honour: one cosmopolitan
and enlightened, the other retrogressive and inward looking. The
liberal attitude posits an anatomy of individual conscience. Cervantes,
according to Castro, was one of the few writers and intellectuals in the
Spain of his time to espouse the liberal view of honour. Why did this
view lose out in Spain against the conservative one?
Castro’s second key idea adopted from Ortega is the contention that
literary genres rely for their existence on an epoch’s worldview. Thus
the writer’s thought or the activity of a literary movement is to be
explained by its spiritual disposition but not determined by
environmental factors. Castro’s interest for us more than a century later
lies in gauging whether his view of Cervantes’s oeuvre is sustainable
across the entire, variegated range of his literary production, always
remembering that at this point we become judges not only of Ortega
and Castro but also of Close their severest critic. We adopt the role of
judge at this point because it is as commentators and critics of
Cervantes qua novelist that we consider as well as Castro himself, his
master Ortega, and Close’s stern verdict on them all. In doing this, we
are invited in our turn to pass judgement on the great scholar and critic
who is damned with faint praise by Close, calling El pensamiento de
Cervantes ‘a brilliant piece of academic journalism’.17 If this is so where
does it leave El pensamiento and the substantial essays that were to
follow and which led Castro into close reading, the intensity of which
Cervantine studies had never before witnessed?
El pensamiento de Cervantes is a massive book demanding the
attention of half a lifetime. Time and space are short so I touch on just
one aspect, what Castro calls the ‘doctrine of error’.18 His second
chapter had acquainted his reader with an arresting concept that he
calls the ‘theme of oscillating reality’.19 When does a barber’s basin
cease to be one? What really happened in the cave of Montesinos?
Cervantes has constructed a world founded on mere appearances. This
does not mean that reality no longer exists. The true realities of right
and wrong, love and hate are there but they have been transformed
into weapons of war in the struggle between good and evil ‘and among
these, none is more important than the freedom to love. Love is the
supreme vital essence.’20
Following neo-Platonic doctrine Cervantes presents nature as
creating out of the force of love a harmonious principle and woe betide
anyone, oblivious to such a truth, who breaks the vital equation. His
literary art whether in prose fiction or in the theatre is as implacable
when wrong has been committed as it is benevolent when loving
human beings come together. Castro finds tragedy in error. He finds
equally an epic exaltation wherever the harmony of reciprocal love is
to be found. In the final analysis, claims Castro, the majority of
Cervantes’s stories either run or flow in these two precisely opposing
directions: El celoso extremeño, Grisóstomo, and El curioso impertinente
stand out in Castro’s ‘erroneous’ series; the story of El cautivo
interpolated in Don Quixote and the romance Persiles y Sigismunda fall
into a ‘harmonious’ series.
By using words like error or mistake, Castro does not just mean a
false interpretation of physical reality which invariably produces a
comic result but also a false interpretation of a moral reality. Castro
finds the most interesting stories to be those that concern moral reality.
Of the many he could have cited, it is intriguing that he chose to
highlight El curioso impertinente. In this novella Anselmo thinks that
Camila’s virtue is gold that can be passed through fire in order to prove
its purity: ‘the consequences of such mistakes tend not to be comic but
rather tragic, and frequently such mistakes are punished by death.’21
While for Castro everything should be considered as under
Cervantes’s control, for others he is the untutored genius who does not
always quite know where his narrative is leading. In what is still one of
the best general surveys of Don Quixote, Part I, E.C. Riley notes this
impression of improvisation but does not agree.22 Neither does
Dominick Finello who has called the Sierra Morena an epicentre of Don
Quixote, Part I that inspires the knight to outline his plan of action
towards the task of renewing the chivalric profession.23 The problem is
made more interesting by the six or seven interpolations that appear, at
least in the eyes of the hasty reader, to dot or speckle the narrative of
Don Quixote’s adventures in Part I. It is most acute at the violent end of
the encounter with the galley-slaves at the close of I.22 when Don
Quixote and Sancho enter the vastly different terrain and ambience of
the Sierra Morena. Here our chronicler looks like a narrator who has
run out of adventures to narrate.
In his comprehensive article, ‘Revision in Don Quixote Part I’,
Geoffrey Stagg draws attention to how Cervantes from chapter to
chapter shuffles episodes and adventures the way others might shuffle a
pack of cards: meadows, woods, and mountain paths succeed one
another with bewildering rapidity. Most famously, the chronicler
reports the theft of Sancho’s ass although subsequently the animal has
mysteriously found its way back to its owner. Stagg concludes that
these are failings that indicate a writer composing his story in haste. In
an equally brilliant article, José María Micó has confirmed Stagg’s
surmise that Cervantes knew only too well that as 1604 wore on, his
book’s most serious competitors, the two picaresque novels, La Pícara
Justina and Guzmán de Alfarache, Part II, were also about to be
published and that of these three, the first to reach the bookstalls might
well prove the most successful given that many book buyers would
purchase only one volume, given the high price of books in those times.
As it happened, although the Guzmán won the race, in the event all
three books were commercially successful.24
Cervantes had still published none of his plays as he entered the new
century, and so he could only with difficulty pass for a professional
author in the literary world in which he moved. Such authors, Castro
maintains, ‘in those days, as today, produced fresh work just as the
vineyards every autumn deliver up their fruit. Cervantes was no
beginner but neither was he experienced.’25 Almost exactly twenty
years had passed since the appearance of La Galatea. Why so long? Was
the act of writing an arduous chore? And why publish this second work
of prose fiction when he finally did? Was it the reading of Guzmán de
Alfarache? The four substantial tales interpolated into the Guzmán
cannot possibly have passed him by. It is unlikely that all the novellas
he eventually placed in Don Quixote, Part I, and in his Novelas
ejemplares published in 1613, were composed after 1600. More
importantly, by 1604 Cervantes was also a master of the novella genre.
Américo Castro declares that as Cervantes prepared for the publication
of Don Quixote, Part I, ‘his confidence in his book was by now
unshakeable’.26 Castro is possibly even more right than he supposes.
Anyone who has read the two magisterial essays that Avalle-Arce
published in his Nuevos deslindes cervantinos [Fresh Cervantine
Perceptions] will surely be convinced that in 1605 the author of Don
Quixote had accomplished even more than the completion of Part I, for
the book contains several remarkable extraneous tales. Among these,
two treat a relationship between two friends, a favourite Cervantine
theme that we have already seen seriously treated in his pastoral novel.
New readers may like to consider the possibility that Cervantes
included them because he judged the simple tale of Don Quixote and
Sancho Panza, despite its touching portrayal of the friendship between
master and man, to be lacking in seriousness, intellectual weight, and
variety. Therefore, he inserted El curioso impertinente and El cautivo. In
point of fact, Cervantes somewhat implausibly contrives to make the
protagonist of the latter cross Don Quixote’s path and tell him his story;
but the Curioso is left in the sublime isolation of its trunk from which it
is extracted and read to the assembled throng in Juan Palomeque’s inn.
On the face of it, this novella is indeed ‘impertinent’, but Avalle-Arce
generously salutes the many critics who have attested to its pertinence.
His two famous essays go further because they confirm the novella
to be a masterpiece. Cervantes may well have considered it the prize
piece among the tales he had ready in 1604. He surely knew its worth
and, fearful that it might otherwise never appear in print, did not
hesitate to include it. Indeed, having it ‘performed’ at the inn is a
measure of his confidence and his pride: ‘The complexity of El curioso
impertinente, from early on acquires an overwhelming presence, the
impact of which gains clarity and power as the reading proceeds.’27
Perhaps the boldest attempt in recent times to make satisfying sense of
the ‘extraneous’ material in Part I of Don Quixote is by Edward Dudley.
The word rhetoric alone employed by Dudley pushes the reader in a
direction of perceiving Cervantes as a writer in total control. Certainly,
as Dudley notes, Cervantes contrives to weave almost all his seven
stories into the central narrative that is concerned with the journey of
Don Quixote and Sancho.28 The seven tales divide in two: those that
have unhappy outcomes and those where things turn out well.
Readers who have come only lately to the Novelas ejemplares will
reflect on the magnitude of Cervantes’s achievement in the field of
prose fiction. In his prologue to the Novelas ejemplares Cervantes boasts
with evident pride: ‘yo soy el primero que he novelado en lengua
castellana, que las muchas novelas que en ella andan impresas, todas
son traducidas de lenguas estranjeras, éstas son mías propias, no
imitadas ni hurtadas; mi ingenio las engendró, y las parió mi pluma’29
[‘the first to have written novellas in the Castilian tongue, for the many
novellas that have been published in Castilian, all of them have been
translated from foreign languages, whereas these are of my own
invention, not imitations nor stolen from others; my genius conceived
them and my pen delivered them’].
The Decameron of Boccaccio had an uneasy start in Spain, having
been placed on the Index of Prohibited Books in 1559. The other most
famous collections of novelle by Bandello and Giraldo Cinthio followed
on in Spanish translations in 1589 and 1590, respectively. This fresh
form of prose fiction was seized upon and eagerly imitated. Spain had
discovered a new literary genre. One of the first things that readers
would have noted was the untrammelled realism with which some of
the stories in Cervantes’s Novelas ejemplares were told as well as the
considerable variety of plots and locations. Readers would soon also
become aware of an almost hallucinatory mixture of the ideal, the
physical, and the spiritual that pervade the collection. At a basic level,
having read all twelve tales, readers are drawn to divide them into two
sets; and even if they resist this temptation, the contrasts between the
idealistic and realistic tales are clear. Cervantes states in his prologue
that he is describing the tales as exemplary, ‘y si bien lo miras, no hay
ninguna de quien no se pueda sacar algún ejemplo provechoso y si no
fuera por no alargar este sujeto, quizá te mostrará el sabroso y honesto
fruto que se podría sacar, así de todas juntas como de cada una de por
sí’30 [‘and if you examine them carefully, there isn’t a single one from
which one cannot extract an encouraging lesson; and not to put too fine
a point upon it, perhaps I shall succeed in making available a tasty and
wholesome fruit, as much from all of them together as from each of
them in turn’]. That is to say each tale has its own individual
exemplary quality, but so does the collection as a whole. Two
outstandingly bold and absorbing attempts at what used to be called an
‘organic’ reading of the work must suffice by way of illustration, given
that so much has been written since.
Joaquín Casalduero’s approach was deceptively simple. He listed the
twelve tales in the customary order, creating a tripartite structure
beginning with the first four in which the protagonists work out their
destiny in an ideal world. Tales one to four are counterbalanced by the
final four in which the protagonists move in what Casalduero called a
social world. The middle four tales are divided into pairs, one
concerning original sin, and the other virtue, and freedom.31
Casalduero now embarks on a series of oppositions beginning with
numbers one and twelve. The ideal world of La gitanilla and the social
world of El coloquio de los perros are set against one another. This is the
first of a series of polarities that advance towards a centre. Thus the
generosity and moral striving of El amante liberal are counterbalanced
by the greed and avarice of El casamiento engañoso. The common
baseness in Rinconete y Cortadillo is set against the nobility in La señora
Cornelia. The mystical union with its Rome pilgrimage in La española
inglesa finds its equal in the social union and Santiago pilgrimage in Las
dos doncellas. The original sin of intelligence in El licenciado vidriera
achieves completeness when set beside the original sin of the senses in
La fuerza de la sangre. Finally, the cloister in El celoso extremeño
demonstrates its tragic inanity when set beside the freedom portrayed
in La ilustre fregona. Casalduero’s study has two obvious things in
common with that of Ruth El Saffar. First, they are important book-
length studies; secondly, they both avoid the idealistic-realistic
dichotomy which has bedevilled Cervantine reader-response.
El Saffar congratulated Casalduero for adopting an a-temporal
approach whereby he navigated a journey through a marvellous and
disconcerting world, attempting to fashion a significant structure for
the twelve tales as well as a relationship between them that will satisfy
their readers. Her own approach was also a-temporal. She too had an
interest in plotting Cervantes’s development as a writer of novellas but
only in so far as this might help in revealing the way in which
exemplariness works in the collection as a whole. While Casalduero
seeks further enlightenment via the order of novellas chosen by
Cervantes, El Saffar seeks through a re-ordering of them to trace the
development of his art. Like Casalduero she sees a tripartite division:
early stories, two transitions, and finally the late stories. El Saffar sees
her three early stories as depicting characters who are striving to
remake their lives whereas in fact none of them does. These early
protagonists construct a fictional world which they hope may prove an
escape from everyday life. This way leads to alienation and destruction.
The later protagonists ‘endure their fictional state. They neither choose
nor invent it…they work for and wait for the end of their trial.’32 Thus
they reach fulfilment and a return to society.
The general consensus among critics is that the location of the
stories is very important for Cervantes, indicating a writer who has
absorbed intensely his experiences in certain places. Peter Dunn
maintains that Cervantes’s most insistent location in the Novelas
ejemplares is Seville which signifies, obsessively, crime and the
underworld. Dunn suggests that this mythic Seville was absorbed
slowly over many years so that, most obviously, the late dating of El
casamiento and El coloquio that many critics have preferred is a
tempting one.33 However, mythic Seville was never going to provide
the heroic ending that Cervantes worked towards and which we
encounter in El amante liberal. This story and most of the others, for
that matter, deliver the kind of mixture the Canon lays before the Priest
as ingredients for the ideal chivalric tale. The result should be a
bewildering but satisfying mixture that is in evidence in the Novelas.
E.C. Riley has stressed how much more highly prose fiction was valued
in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries when it was considered
alongside the epic. El amante liberal is a mere novella, not aspiring to
the High Style that still belonged exclusively to epic poetry and tragic
theatre,34 but its epic hero gives a glimpse of where Cervantes’s literary
ambitions lay in his final decade. It is impossible to do justice to the
colossal amount that has been written about the meanings of these
twelve stories since the classic studies of Casalduero and El-Saffar. New
readers will also wonder yet again at the tardy publication of the
Novelas. We are obliged to wait for a further eight years for their
appearance. By l613 Cervantes had only another three years to live.
Just as nobody knows precisely when Cervantes finally started
composing Don Quixote, Parts I or II or his novellas, nobody knows
when he stopped writing plays. In the prologue to his collected plays he
boasts that back in the old days, safely within the pre-Lopean phase of
his literary career, his plays were well received and indeed never met
with any hostility whatever.
As he made his final revision of Don Quixote, Part I in 1604, he must
have felt similarly given that his Galatea had been very well received.
Of course there was the notorious letter of 14 August 1604 in which
Lope de Vega expresses his low opinion of the budding Spanish poets
who had ushered in the new century. These, Lope opined, were not
much good as poets although, as to their intellects, at least it could be
said that none of them was stupid enough to praise Don Quixote.35 By
then, in any case, his Galatea and his satirical poems had earned
Cervantes a respect in literary circles that even a literary lion such as
Lope could not take away. In 1580 there was of course as yet no Lope,
and even had there been one it was to the theatre Cervantes
instinctively turned. It is to be assumed that he wrote some twenty to
thirty plays over a roughly five-year period. Only two of these survive;
insufficient to gauge his capacity when it came to constructing a stage
poetic.
Add to this the subsequent verdict shared by many critics that lack
of dramatic gifts have left his extant dramatic oeuvre irremediably
incomplete and unsatisfactory. As to the tail end of his career qua
dramatist, McKendrick goes a long way towards explaining why Don
Quixote, Part II took so long to appear in published form.36 Cervantes
was still trying to write plays that might appeal to the public and
continued to be tormented by Lope’s success. So, having published his
single major achievement as poet, the plays beckoned inexorably. It is
not, of course, for his plays that Harold Bloom made it a mission to
declare to the world that Cervantes was Shakespeare’s equal, although
Edward Friedman, among other distinguished critics, has made a case
for Cervantes as a dramatist of considerable ambition: an imperfect
dramatist in an imperfect world, but one who understood that world
and knew how to bring it to the stage so that ‘through the concentric
and episodic structure of his comedias, is a master of the fusion and
confusion of fiction with reality’.37 Lope’s theory of the ideal play
stresses the principle of unity of action. This presupposes adoption of a
single, linear action. In fact, for many critics like Friedman, Cervantes
stands between the Italo-Roman tradition and Lope de Vega: ‘If the
literary theorists “rewrite” Aristotle, Cervantes may be said to rewrite
both Aristotle and the theorists. In what are termed his six “archetypal”
plays, he offers a unique type of unity by refocusing the limits of plot
and episodes.’38
For Stanislav Zimic, among the six archetypal comedias, La
entretenida describes clearly the gulf that lies between the comedia
nueva of Lope and the theatre of Cervantes; the former is a parody of
the comedia nueva. Zimic’s essay is an important study of the
differences between Lope and Cervantes as playwrights. Don Antonio
claims to be passionately in love with Marcela. Her function in the play
is to be pursued by him but their relationship is a formulaic gesture
neatly expressed by a most ingenious Cervantine metaphor: the total
absence of Marcela throughout the play. In other words, Marcela never
actually appears on stage. So it is that ‘Cervantes mocks the comedia
nueva rule whereby Cupid’s aim is always true while woman is given
over exclusively to romance or love’.39 In Cervantes’s theatre servants
are as humble as in real life, but they also fall in love and in this play
the passion is true. Such is the superiority of Ocaña over his master
Don Antonio. Casalduero claims that in the Baroque the comic servant
has the same preoccupations as those of his master but in the world of
Cervantes the servant is his own man. ‘Don Quixote is concerned with
Dulcinea, Sancho with his island…For this reason Sancho can be alone,
alone on the island, alone when Don Quixote dies.’40
Cervantes has been frequently viewed as a contradictory and even
confused dramatist. He has been harshly criticized for his use of figuras
morales, personifications of an often allegorical nature. For Bruce
Wardropper, however, their use is ‘a sign of the independence and
originality of Cervantes’s theatre’.41 What they do is to exteriorize the
inner person and in that sense they are Cervantes’s invention. For
instance, fate and history are the agents controlling the course of events
in El cerco de Numancia, Cervantes’s tragedy about the Roman siege of
the Numantine capital city. Allegorical figures like Spain, the river
Duero, war, illness, and hunger are appropriate as a means of
underscoring the universality of the play. Friedman does not say so, but
he is in effect demonstrating Cervantes’s evident pride in having
introduced to the Spanish stage those figures. They ‘elevate the action
of Numancia to its historical and eternal planes’.42 Some critics have a
fragmentary vision of Cervantes’s theatre. They approach it with their
own expectations of what they should find there. A classic example is
the reaction of critics to what happens after the sleazily entertaining
Act One of El rufián dichoso. Acts Two and Three are habitually
condemned as dull, although they are doing what the title of the play
foretells: show the conversion of the protagonist Cristóbal Lugo and
what befalls him henceforth. Radical transformation of whatever type is
a very Cervantine trait and Lugo’s conversion is a case in point.
Cervantes is kind and indulgent in his reading of humanity when he
shows compassion towards characters such as Lugo. ‘Sin and
repentance, mankind in all its variety reaches its most concentrated
form in El rufián dichoso and Pedro de Urdemalas.’43 Valbuena Prat
called Pedro de Urdemalas one of his most original plays.44 Pedro de
Urdemalas comes from folklore and is at the same time a protean figure
destined to assume all the necessary elements of a flesh and blood
individual’s needs. He becomes an actor throughout the story of Belica,
and after playing his series of roles, he becomes the gypsy trickster and
eventually vanishes. Pedro develops surely and slowly into a repository
of all the wisdom in the world ‘at a humble level which is to say, not
tragic but comic’.45 Casalduero is admiring here the way in which, in
exquisite detail, Cervantes works out through the action of his drama
the gathering in of all Pedro’s wisdom.
No one better than Eugenio Asensio, doyen among scholars who
have dedicated much time and thought to the entremeses, could situate
them not just among Cervantes’s works for the stage but within his
total oeuvre. He makes a good case for Cervantes as pioneer creator of
the entremés which he distinguishes from Medieval and Renaissance
farce. For Asensio, the Cervantine entremés deserves to be called the
‘nuevo género chico’ [‘new small-sized genre’].46 In the process Asensio
points the way towards recognition that Cervantes is responsible for
forging yet another genre, the one-act comedy. In his masterly study
Itinerario del entremés [A Journey through the Interludes] Asensio had
suggested that the comedias and the entremeses should be approached as
a whole. They present together the same preoccupations and do so in
their own, new fashion. Canavaggio agrees, suggesting that Cervantes is
at one and the same time a disciple, a pioneer, and a marginal.47 In
other words, it has become customary to see Cervantes as occupying a
position midway between the pioneers of vernacular drama in Spain
and its apex in the comedia nueva. So it is that the second chapter of the
history of Spanish Golden Age Drama by Wilson and Moir is
appropriately titled ‘From Rueda to Cervantes’. Wilson and Moir take a
conventional position when they dismiss roundly the comedias of
Cervantes, none of which they claim, possess the ‘tension of
Numancia’.48 They are to be congratulated, however, on the other hand
for highlighting the importance of Torres Naharro’s (1485?–1520)
dramatic theory through to Lope de Vega. They are joined in this by
Canavaggio, whose study is a massively authoritative overview of
Cervantes’s career as dramatist. He has one eye on Naharro’s Prohemio
[Prologue] to the Propalladia [Collected Plays] and the other on
Cervantes’s progress as dramatist from Los tratos de Argel to Pedro de
Urdemalas. However this might be, despite all the fine critical work and
that of other scholars such as Casalduero, Hermenegildo, and Froldi,
new readers will discover that this substantial segment of Cervantes’s
oeuvre has still not received the attention it deserved by the end of the
twentieth century.
By the third quarter of 1615, Part II of Don Quixote had still not seen
the light of day, and yet his Ocho comedias y ocho entremeses nuevos
nunca representados were on sale. Was this because ultimately Cervantes
believed so strongly in his worth as a dramatist? Had he less confidence
in the possible success of a second Quixote? There was, surely,
satisfaction from having reached the contemporary public in print if
not on the stage. In the year that separated the publication of the
Novelas ejemplares from his parte [collection of plays], two things
happened: Cervantes published his mock epic poem, Viaje del Parnaso;
and Alonso Fernández de Avellaneda struck by publishing his ‘false’ or
spurious Don Quixote. The identity of this writer has never been
established.
The Viaje is by far Cervantes’s longest and most ambitious poem:
3,308 hendecasyllable lines. It is well described by William Byron in his
biography of Cervantes.49 Its chief interest for today’s cervantistas will
probably lie in assessing the quality of Cervantes’s relationship with the
Spanish literary world of his day, which Cervantes portrays in an
amusing and distinctly burlesque manner.50 Its climax is a battle
between the good poets and the bad. When the battle has ended,
although figuring among the victorious good poets, Cervantes is not
one of those granted a laurel wreath by Apollo, so to return to a state of
slumber is a typically ironic Cervantine response at the close of a work
that Vicente Gaos has called the poetic testimony of Cervantes.51
Many have been quite content to divide Cervantes’s poetry into two
parts for a logical reason that the sheer size of the Viaje in eight
chapters plus Adjunct in prose dialogue, not to mention its ambition,
dwarfs his remaining poetic production, thus setting it apart from the
rest of the Cervantine poetic corpus. However, Elias Rivers reminds us
that there is far more to Cervantes the poet. The extant lyric poems of
Cervantes are many and embrace his entire career from the late 1560s
to the poems that punctuate the Galatea, Don Quixote, his posthumous
romance Persiles, as well as the so-called poesias sueltas [occasional
poems]. These last contain biographical as well as poetic interest.52
Such is the case of Epístola a Mateo Vázquez [Letter to Mateo Vázquez],
an address to the secretary of state Mateo Vázquez (1542?–91), a
favourite of Philip II. This poem contains more than a hint of desperate
defiance on the part of a man seeking preferment, although any tone of
ingratiation is deftly avoided. The defiant tone adopted by Cervantes
grows stronger in the two canzoni composed before the full horror of
defeat of the Spanish Armada became known. Any grounds for
optimism concerning a possible victory evaporate when the time comes
to grapple in sonnet form with the triumphant incursion of the Earl of
Essex (1565–1601) into southern Spain in 1596 and with the death two
years later of Philip II.
One only has to read Cervantes’s address to his reader at the
opening of Don Quixote, Part II to realize what a shock it had been to
learn that the adventures of Don Quixote had been plagiarized at
considerable length by the mysterious Avellaneda. The blow was all the
more hurtful because of the mockery to which Cervantes was subjected.
His state of mind can be gauged by the fact that four-fifths of the
prologue to the true second Quixote were taken up by a full and strong
rejoinder. It is left to the two writers of aprobaciones [official approvals]
to remind the public of Cervantes’s original declared goal to do away
with the contagious idleness fostered by books of chivalry, but the first
fifty-nine chapters of this real Part II renew Don Quixote’s desire to
press forward with his chivalric quest.
Two obvious factors have made possible the comic tale Cervantes
had created in his Part I: the madness of Don Quixote and the
adventures he shared with his servant companion Sancho Panza. These
matters have given rise to many studies, of which the following two are
representative. Salvador de Madariaga is still worth reading for his
pioneering analysis of the ever-evolving relationship between Don
Quixote and Sancho as well as for his chapters on two more important
characters in Part I: Dorotea and Cardenio. Regarding Don Quixote’s
madness, Madariaga describes the manner in which it is soon laid to
one side and has thus inevitably become a sort of ‘enemy within’. The
gnawing doubt that is simply harsh reality will stalk Don Quixote until
he can truly be said to have recovered his senses.53 Sancho
accompanies this process and develops into a second Quixote, or Don
Quixote in another key.54
Many have been the attempts to describe and explain the psychology
of Don Quixote. Carroll Johnson’s is recommended as one of the most
stimulating. In Johnson’s view of the madness we have a reading
grounded in the psychology of the male climacteric. Don Quixote is the
man who cannot master his middle age upsurge of sexuality presently
directed towards a forbidden object: his own niece. He attempts escape
in vicarious chivalric pseudo-adventures, and having failed despite
plunging into his chivalric reading, he is forced to flee his home. By
now, desperate, he creates a fantasy knight’s lady, Dulcinea. She has no
effect either as abstraction or as a reality. Carried home in his cage at
the end of Part I, he is returning to the place he has fled, and
condemned yet again to the proximity of his niece.55
The relationship between Don Quixote and Sancho, ever closer as
the narrative of Part I advances, has an innocence that is to be blown
away in the course of Part II. The Duke and Duchess drive a wedge
between knight and squire that ‘has the effect of institutionalizing an
adversarial relationship between the two which lasts until chapter
seventy-two’.56 Sancho remains a chivalric squire throughout Part II,
but the questionable renown won by our heroes has changed their
relations with the chivalric world. Many critics have seen Part II as the
process whereby Don Quixote regains his reason. Certainly this happens
eventually. But when? And how? Edwin Williamson has suggested that
much more important is Cervantes’s single-minded determination to
place before Don Quixote an endless series of compensations that leave
his chivalric world in place. They supply constantly a comic energy the
story requires.57 Howard Mancing sees Part I as a vast comic adventure
yet ‘the very use of the word adventure becomes problematic during
Don Quixote’s third sally’.58 The Don Quixote and Sancho Panza of Part
II remain capable of being forceful individuals, and yet they show as
well a sense of helplessness most obviously in the ducal palace, in
Barcelona, in the cave of Montesinos, and in Sancho’s pit. After all, if
Henry Sullivan in his mythic and theological reading of Part II titled
Grotesque Purgatory is right, these last two events are a double catabasis
and a Purgatory in this life for master and man. The degree of
impotence portrayed by Don Quixote and Sancho in Part II for many
will contradict the view of the book offered by Castro’s essay on the
Prologues in Hacia Cervantes. For Castro, Don Quixote sets out from
home to seek adventures, and the chivalric heroism he chooses to
imitate is a mere framework to express his extreme individuality.59
Avalle-Arce and Riley echo Castro, showing Don Quixote’s intent to
make life a work of art, knowing full well that life is a dream, but
living it all the while as if this were not so.60
The books of chivalry fade away and so too does the picaresque,
according to Castro’s late study, Cervantes y los casticismos españoles
(1966), that purports to see off Guzmán de Alfarache as serious rival to
Don Quixote in what some critics have seen as the dawn of the modern
novel.61 Detractors of the Guzmán like Castro see the confrontation
between Don Quixote and Ginés de Pasamonte in I.22 as a victory for
Cervantes’s many-sided genius, as well as his rejection of first person
narrative. Peter Dunn in his impressive reassessment of the Spanish
picaresque novel regards a supposed enmity between Guzmán de
Alfarache and Don Quixote as a distraction, leaving the Guzmán as a
masterpiece the reading of which enabled Cervantes to discover the
course he himself should take.62
This leaves the third and possibly the most fruitful of his
inspirational modes, the pastoral; on the face of it the most unlikely of
the three. Cervantes, who mocks the pastoral novel but rarely, and
most notably in Rinconete, never does so in the Quixote. So, Castro tells
us, Cervantes turns his back on the city and sets out into the
countryside ‘in search of goatherds, of Marcelas, of transhumant flocks,
of windmills’.63
Don Quixote’s three sallies have one obvious similarity in that they
represent his will to fame and glory. At the same time his intention to
take part in jousting at Zaragoza, an urban space, is in blunt
contradiction to the pastoral ideal, given that ‘the dominant idea of
pastoral is a search for simplicity away from a complexity represented
either by a specific location…from which the refuge is in a rural retreat
of Arcadia; or from a specific period of individual existence’.64
Zaragoza or Barcelona leads us back into the picaresque mode. An
alternative urban myth now threatens. Of course Barcelona represents
Cervantes’s will to vengeance over the Aragonese usurper, but for his
knight, visiting the city of Barcelona is a kind of apotheosis. Everything
there transpires to make him feel feted, admired, exalted, and yet at the
same time, on a mythic and psychotic level, he and Sancho are no
longer what they were. This interplay of strength and weakness is
delicately described by L.A. Murillo in his mythic reading of the closing
chapters of Part II.65
Cervantes penned his dedication in Los trabajos de Persiles y
Sigismunda four days before he died. The most obvious sign of haste lies
in the organization of the book: in four parts of which Part I is 100
pages and Part II eighty pages, while Parts III and IV are forty and sixty
pages long, respectively. We know that Cervantes’s model and
inspiration was the Greek Byzantine romance, Aithiopika [Ethiopian
Story] by Heliodorus (c.250–380), that relates the history of the loves of
Theagenes and Chariclea.
As he himself made perfectly clear, Cervantes set great store by this,
his last work of the imagination published posthumously in 1617. Had
he lived a little longer, he would have been gratified by the book’s
success but he would have experienced profound chagrin thereafter by
the way in which it became, by the nineteenth century, a forgotten
work. Among the notable twentieth-century critical defenders of the
Persiles, Casalduero, who is peculiarly, as well as fruitfully, sanguine
concerning any work by Cervantes, and Avalle-Arce, stand out. In his
final book-length Cervantine study, Casalduero has caught an aspect of
the work to which some other commentators have perhaps been
impervious: the poetry present in the overall structure of Persiles.
Casalduero has used a recapitulation of Cervantes’s romance to show
how this book can be seen to complete a view of our author’s lived
experience. The polarity that is his life is displayed in Don Quixote, Part
I and summed up in the speeches on the Golden Age and Arms and
Letters. His Novelas ejemplares, Don Quixote, Part II, and Persiles go far
beyond the single individual in order to present us and complete for us
a vast picture of mankind and society.66 For Avalle-Arce, Persiles is
explained by a theory opposed to that of Casalduero; Don Quixote the
book had explored sufficiently perspectivism and relativism as literary
devices. Persiles confronts the absolute as material for prose fiction.
Here, Cervantes’s new imperative is one of certainties and absolute
truths.67 Cervantes had neither wish nor need to repeat the Quixote. For
this reason, we have the Persiles. Having read the romance and its
critics, new readers may have no cause to take part in this dispute. On
the other hand, even if they feel tempted to join the ranks of the
defenders, their elders are not always helpful.
Alban Forcione’s two books make for instructive and fascinating
reading, but do nothing for the reputation of Cervantes’s romance. We
are informed that souls reach God via a great chain of being which is
metaphorical and ends in Heaven or in Hell. The problem is that in
Persiles the elect are too easily identifiable and the narrative marks
them out early. Periandro, Auristela, and their party are received in
Lisbon like royalty. They are, of course, royal but nobody is supposed
to know. Their path is already triumphant. According to Forcione the
early episodes related in Part III of Persiles ‘establish the tone of comedy
that predominates throughout the rest of the work’.68 However, Ángel
del Río observes that the tone of comedy in Persiles, the humour that
any comic epic must possess, ‘has a very secondary role, purely
circumstantial’.69
Avalle-Arce. Casalduero, El Saffar, Wilson, Bandera, Randel,
Beringer, and others would all concur that we have come a long way
from a climate in which Menéndez Pelayo felt able to describe Persiles
as a sign of premature senility on Cervantes’s part. Indeed, it now
seems clear that Parts III and IV were composed at the same time as the
true Don Quixote, Part II. This in itself creates an inviting question mark
for the twenty-first century, which in turn leads on to yet another.
Spanish Golden Age literature has frequently been taxed for a failure to
produce a work that could be considered a truly major secondary epic.
That is to say, there has been no Milton, no Camões, no Tasso, no
Ariosto (pace the Italian’s considerable influence on Cervantes discussed
elsewhere in this volume), and of course, no Dante—or so we have
been led to believe. But in these early years of the twenty-first century
we are being invited, surely, to consider the possibility that the Persiles
has provided what hitherto has been lacking: and so, Cervantes’s
mediocre romance may come to be seen as the Divine Comedy of
Baroque Europe. Cervantine criticism of this new century, sooner or
later, will deliver its verdict.
I have chosen to write this survey of Cervantine criticism up to the
close of the twentieth century in the form of a single essay in order to
provide an accessible, readable approach to a vast topic for the general
reader as well as the specialist. With a single exception, the critical
fortunes of Cervantes’s works are treated here in the order in which
they were originally published. I have tried to give an account of the
connectedness of the various works as Cervantes produced them. This
seems to me particularly necessary in the case of Don Quixote, Part I,
given that its lengthy gestation appears to coincide with Cervantes’s
appropriation and transformation of the Italian novella.
Works Cited
Allen, John J. Don Quixote: Hero or Fool? A Study in Narrative Technique
(Gainesville: University of Florida, 1971).
Allen, John J. Don Quixote: Hero or Fool? Part Two (Gainesville: University of
Florida, 1979).
Ascunce Arrieta, José Ángel. Los quijotes del Quijote. Historia de una aventura
creativa (Kassel: Edition Reichenberger, 1997).
Asensio, Eugenio. ‘Entremeses’. In Suma Cervantina, edited by Juan Bautista
Avalle-Arce and E.C. Riley (London: Tamesis Books, 1973), pp. 171–97.
Asensio, Eugenio. Itinerario del entremés: desde Lope de Rueda a Quiñones de
Benavente (Madrid: Gredos, 1965).
Auerbach, Erich. Mimesis: The Representation of Reality in Western Literature,
translated by Willard R. Trask (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University
Press, 1974).
Avalle-Arce, J.B. Nuevos deslindes cervantinos (Barcelona: Ariel, 1975).
Avalle-Arce, Juan Bautista and E.C. Riley. ‘Don Quijote’. In Suma Cervantina,
edited by Avalle-Arce and Riley (London: Tamesis Books, 1973), pp. 47–79.
Avellaneda, Alonso Fernández de. El ingenioso hidalgo Don Quijote de la Mancha,
que contiene su tercera salida y es la quinta parte de sus aventuras, edited by
Fernando García Salinero (Madrid: Editorial Castalia, 1980).
Aylward, E.T. Towards a Revaluation of Avellaneda’s False Quixote (Newark,
Delaware: Juan de la Cuesta, 1989).
Azorín. La ruta de Don Quijote (Madrid: Cátedra, 2005).
Bandera, Cesáreo. Mimesis conflictiva: Ficción literaria y violencia en Cervantes y
Calderón (Madrid: Gredos, 1975).
Beer, Gillian. The Romance (London: Methuen, 1970).
Beringer, Arthur A. ‘Persiles and the Time Labyrinth’. Hispanófila 41, no.1
(1971): pp. 1–11.
Bloom, Harold. The Western Canon: The Books and School of the Ages (New York:
Riverhead Books, 1995).
Burton, A.P. ‘Cervantes the man seen through English eyes in the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries’. Bulletin of Hispanic Studies 45, no.1 (1968): pp. 1–5.
Byron, William. Cervantes: A Biography (London: Cassell, 1979).
Canavaggio, Jean. Cervantes, translated by J.R. Jones (New York: W.W. Norton,
1990).
Canavaggio, Jean. Cervantès dramaturge: un theatre à naître (Paris: Presses
Universitaires, 1977).
Canavaggio, Jean. La invención de la novela (Madrid: Casa de Velázquez, 1999).
Casalduero, Joaquín. ‘La Galatea’. In Suma Cervantina, edited by Juan Bautista
Avalle-Arce and E.C. Riley (London: Tamesis Books, 1973), pp. 27–46.
Casalduero, Joaquín. Sentido y forma de las Novelas ejemplares (Buenos Aires:
Instituto de Filología, 1943).
Casalduero, Joaquín. Sentido y forma de Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda
(Buenos Aires: Editorial Sudamericana, 1947).
Casalduero, Joaquín. Sentido y forma del Quijote (Madrid: Ediciones Ínsula,
1949).
Casalduero, Joaquín. Sentido y forma del teatro de Cervantes (Madrid: Aguilar,
1951).
Castro, Américo. ‘Algunas observaciones acerca del concepto del honor en los
siglos XVI y XVII’. Revista de filología española 3 (1916): pp. 1–50.
Castro, Américo. Cervantes y los casticismos españoles (Madrid-Barcelona:
Alfaguara, 1966).
Castro, Américo. El pensamiento de Cervantes (Barcelona-Madrid: Editorial
Noguer, 1973).
Castro, Américo. Hacia Cervantes (Madrid: Taurus, 1960).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Don Quijote, edited by Diego Clemencín, 6 vols (Madrid:
D.E. Aguado, 1833–9).
Cervantes, Miguel de. El ingenioso hidalgo don Quijote de la Mancha, edited by
Luis Andrés Murillo, 3 vols (Madrid: Castalia, 1978).
Cervantes, Miguel de. El ingenioso hidalgo don Quijote de la Mancha, edited by
Juan Antonio Pellicer, 5 vols (Madrid: Gabriel de Sancha, 1797–98).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Historia del famoso caballero Don Quixote de la Mancha,
edited by John Bowle, 6 vols (London and Salisbury, 1781).
Cervantes, Miguel de. La Galatea, edited by Francisco López Estrada y María
Teresa López García-Berdoy (Madrid: Cátedra, 1995).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Los trabajos de Persiles y Sigismunda, edited by Juan
Batista Avalle-Arce (Madrid: Castalia, 1969).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Novelas ejemplares, edited by Harry Sieber, 2 vols
(Madrid: Cátedra, 1981).
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de. Obras Completas, edited by R. Schevill y A.
Bonilla, 18 vols (Madrid: Imprenta de Bernardo Rodríguez, Gráficas Reunidas,
1914–41).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Poesías completas, Viaje del Parnaso y Adjunta al Parnaso,
edited by Vicente Gaos (Madrid: Castalia, 1980).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Teatro Completo, edited by Florencio Sevilla Arroyo and
Antonio Rey Hazas (Barcelona: Planeta, 1987).
Cervantes, Miguel de. Viage del Parnaso y poesías varias, edited by Elias L. Rivers
(Madrid: Espasa-Calpe, 1991).
Close, Anthony. Cervantes and the Comic Mind of His Age (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2000).
Close, Anthony. ‘La crítica del Quijote desde 1925 hasta ahora’. In Cervantes,
edited by Pablo Jauralde Pou, et. al. (Madrid: Centro de estudios cervantinos,
1995), pp 311–33.
Close, Anthony. The Romantic Approach to Don Quixote (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1978).
Damiani, Bruno. ‘The Rhetoric of Death in La Galatea’. In La Galatea de
Cervantes-cuatrocientos anõs después (Cervantes y lo pastoril), edited by Juan
Bautista Avalle-Arce (Newark: Juan de la Cuesta, 1985), pp. 53–70.
Díez Borque, José María (ed.), Historia del teatro en España, 2 vols (Madrid:
Taurus, 1983).
Doody, Margaret Anne. The True Story of the Novel (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers
University Press, 1997).
Dudley, Edward. ‘Don Quijote as Magus: the Rhetoric of Interpolation’. Bulletin
of Hispanic Studies 49 no. 4 (1972): pp. 355–68.
Dunn, Peter N. ‘Las Novelas ejemplares’. In Suma Cervantina, edited by Juan
Bautista Avalle-Arce and E.C. Riley (London: Tamesis Books, 1973), pp. 81–
118.
Dunn, Peter N. Spanish Picaresque Fiction: A New Literary History (Ithaca and
London: Cornell University Press, 1993).
Durán, Manuel. La Ambiguedad en el Quijote (Xalapa: Universidad Veracruzana,
1960).
Eisenberg, Daniel. Estudios cervantinos (Barcelona: Sirmio, 1991).
El Saffar, Ruth. Beyond Fiction: The Recovery of the Feminine in the Novels of
Cervantes (Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: University of California Press,
1984).
El Saffar, Ruth. Distance and Control in Don Quixote (Chapel Hill: Department of
Romance Languages, 1975).
El Saffar, Ruth. Novel to Romance: A Study of Cervantes’s Novelas ejemplares
(Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press, 1974).
Fielding, Henry. Joseph Andrews (London: Dent, 1962).
Finello, Dominick. Pastoral Themes and Forms in Cervantes’s Fiction (Lewisberg:
Bucknell University, 1994).
Flores, R.M. ‘Cervantes at Work: The Writing of Don Quixote Part I’. Journal of
Hispanic Philology 3 (1979): pp. 135–60.
Forcione, Alban K. Cervantes, Aristotle and the Persiles (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1970).
Forcione, Alban K. Cervantes’s Christian Romance: A Study of Persiles y
Sigismunda (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1972).
Friedman, Edward H. The Unifying Concept: Approaches to the Structure of
Cervantes’s Comedias (York, SC: Spanish Literature Publications Company,
1981).
Froldi, Rinaldo. Lope de Vega y la formación de la Comedia (Madrid: Anaya,
1968).
Gaos, Vicente. Cervantes: Novelista, dramaturgo, poeta (Barcelona: Planeta,
1979).
Gaultier, Jules de. Le Bovarysme (Paris: Mercure de la France, 1902).
Gilman, Stephen. Cervantes y Avellaneda: estudio de una imitación (México: El
Colegio de Mexico, 1951).
Girard, René. Mensonge romantique et vérité romanesque (Paris: Grasset, 1961).
Guillén, Claudio (ed). Cervantes (Madrid: Centro de estudios cervantinos, 1995).
Haley, George. ‘The Narrator in Don Quijote: Maese Pedro’s Puppet Show’.
Modern Language Notes 80, no. 2 (1965): pp. 145–65.
Hart, Thomas R. Cervantes’s Exemplary Fictions: A Study of the Novelas
ejemplares (Kentucky: Lexington University Press, 1994).
Hermenegildo, Afredo. La Numancia de Cervantes (Madrid: Sociedad General
Española de Librería, 1976).
Horst, Robert ter. The Fortunes of the Novel: A Study in the Transposition of a
Genre (New York: Peter Lang, 2003).
Ife, B.W. Reading and Fiction in the Golden Age (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1985).
Iffland, James. De fiestas y aguafiestas: risa, locura, e ideología en Cervantes y
Avellaneda (Madrid/Frankfurt: Universidad de Navarra/Vervuert, 1989).
Johnson, Carroll B. Madness and Lust: A Psychoanalytical Approach to Don
Quixote (Berkeley, Los Angeles, London: University of California Press, 1983).
Jump, John D. Burlesque (London: Methuen, 1972).
Lathrop, Tom. Don Quixote Dictionary (Newark, DE: Juan de la Cuesta, 1999).
Lope de Vega. Epistolario, edited by A. G. de Amezúa, 4 vols (Madrid: Real
Academia Española, 1961).
Lukács, Georg. The Theory of the Novel, translated by Anna Bostock (London:
Merlin Press, 1971).
Madariaga, Salvador de. Don Quixote: An introductory essay in Psychology
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1935).
Madariaga, Salvador de. Guía del lector del Quijote (Buenos Aires: Editorial
Sudamericana, 1941). First published in 1926.
Mancing, Howard. The Chivalric World of Don Quijote: Style, Structure, and
Narrative Technique (Columbia & London: University of Missouri Press, 1982).
Marías, Julián. ‘Introducción’. In Meditaciones del Quijote by José Ortega y
Gasset (Madrid: Ediciones de la Universidad de Puerto Rico, 1957), pp. ix–
xxviii.
Marinelli, Peter V. Pastoral (London: Methuen, 1971).
McKendrick, Melveena. Cervantes (Boston and Toronto: Little, Brown &
Company, 1980).
McKendrick, Melveena. Theatre in Spain: 1490–1700 (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1992).
McKendrick, Melveena. Women and Society in the Spanish Drama of the Golden
Age: A Study of the mujer varonil (London: Cambridge University Press, 1974).
Menéndez Pidal, Ramón. De Cervantes y Lope de Vega (Buenos Aires and México:
Austral, 1945).
Micó, José María. ‘Prosas y prisas en 1604: El Quijote, el Guzmán y La Pícara
Justina’. In Hommage à Robert Jammes, edited by F. Cerdan, 3 vols (Toulouse:
Presses Universitaires de Mirail, 1994), vol. 3, pp. 827–48.
Murillo, L.A. The Golden Dial: Temporal configuration in Don Quijote (Oxford:
Dolphin, 1975).
Nerlich, Michael. El ‘Persiles’ descodificado, o la Divina Comedia de Cervantes
(Madrid: Ediciones Hisperión, 2005).
Ortega y Gasset, José. Meditaciones del Quijote (Madrid: Ediciones de la
Universidad de Puerto Rico, 1957).
Parker, A.A. ‘Fielding and the Structure of Don Quixote’. Bulletin of Hispanic
Studies 33, no. 1 (1956): pp. 1–16.
Parr, James A. Don Quixote: An Anatomy of Subversive Discourse (Newark, DE:
Juan de la Cuesta, 1988).
Ponseti, Helena Percas de. Cervantes y su concepto de su arte: estudio crítico de
algunos aspectos y episodios del Quijote, 2 vols (Madrid: Gredos, 1975).
Randel, Mary Gaylord. ‘Ending and Meaning in Cervantes’s Persiles y
Sigismunda’. Romanic Review 74, no. 2 (1983): pp. 152–69.
Redondo, Agustín. Otra manera de leer el Quijote (Madrid: Castalia, 1999).
Ricapito, Joseph V. Cervantes’s Novelas ejemplares: Between History and
Creativity (West Lafayette, Indiana: Purdue University Press, 1996).
Riley, E.C. Cervantes’s Theory of the Novel (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1968).
Riley, E.C. Don Quixote (London: Allen & Unwin, 1986).
Rio, Ángel del. Historia de la literatura española, 2 vols (Barcelona: Bruguera,
1982).
Riquer, Martín de. Para leer a Cervantes (Barcelona: Acantilado, 2003).
Rivers, Elias L. ‘Viaje del Parnaso y poesías sueltas’. In Suma Cervantina, edited
by Juan Bautista Avalle-Arce and E.C. Riley (London: Tamesis Books, 1973),
pp. 119–246.
Rodríguez, Alberto. La conversación en el Quijote: subdiálogo, memoria y asimetría
(York, SC: Spanish Literary Publications, 1995).
Rojas, Ricardo. Poesías de Cervantes: compiladas y prologadas (Buenos Aires: Coni
Hermanos, 1916).
Rosales, Luis. Cervantes y la Libertad, 2 vols (Madrid: Sociedad de Estudios y
Publicaciones, 1960).
Rosenblat, Ángel. La lengua del Quijote (Madrid: Gredos, 1971).
Russell, P.E. ‘Don Quixote as a funny book’. In Modern Language Review, 64
(1969): pp. 312–26.
Sicroff, Albert A. ‘Entorno al Quijote como obra cómica’. In Actas del II Coloquio
Internacional de la Asociación de Cervantistas (i: Anthropos, 1991), pp. 353–66.
Solé-Leris, Amadeu. The Spanish Pastoral Novel (Boston: Twayne, 1980).
Spitzer, Leo. Linguística e historia literaria (Madrid: Gredos, 1955).
Stagg, Geoffrey. ‘Revision in Don Quixote Part I’. In Hispanic Studies in Honour of
Ignacio González Llubera, edited by Frank Pierce (Oxford: Dolphin, 1959), pp.
347–66.
Stamm, James. ‘La Galatea y el concepto de género: un acercamiento’. In
Cervantes: su obra y su mundo. Actas de I Congreso Internacional sobre Cervantes,
edited by Manuel Criado de Val (1981): pp. 337–43.
Sullivan, Henry W. Grotesque Purgatory: A Study of Cervantes’s Don Quixote, Part
II (Pennsylvania: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1996).
Surtz, Ronald E., Jaime Ferrán, and Daniel P. Testa, editors. Américo Castro: The
Impact of His Thought (Madison: Hispanic Seminary of Medieval Studies,
1988).
Unamuno, Miguel de. ‘La vida de Don Quijote y Sancho’. In Obras completas
(Madrid: Afrodisio Aguado, 1958), IV, pp. 7–384.
Valbuena Prat, Ángel. El teatro español en su Siglo de Oro (Barcelona: Planeta,
1969).
Wardropper, Bruce W. ‘Comedias’. In Suma Cervantina, edited by J.B. Avalle-
Arce y E.C. Riley (London: Tamesis Books, 1973), pp. 147–69.
Wardropper, Bruce W. ‘Don Quixote: Story or History’. In Modern Philology 63,
no. 1 (1965): pp. 1–11.
Wardropper, Bruce W. ‘The Pertinence of El curioso impertinente’. Papers of the
Modern Language Association 72, no. 4 (1957): pp. 587–600.
Weiger, John G. In the Margins of Cervantes (Hanover, ME: University Press of
New England, 1988).
Weiger, John G. The Substance of Cervantes (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1985).
Williamson, Edwin. El Quijote y los libros de caballerías, translated by M. Jesús
Fernández Prieto (Madrid: Taurus, 1991).
Wilson, Diana de Armas. Allegories of Love: Cervantes’s Persiles and Sigismunda
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1991).
Wilson, M. and Duncan, Moir. The Golden Age Drama 1492–1700 (London:
Ernest Benn, 1971).
Zimic, Stanislav. El teatro de Cervantes (Madrid: Castalia, 1992).
1 McKendrick, Cervantes, p. 99.
2 Canavaggio, Cervantes, p. 107.
3 See their introduction in Cervantes, La Galatea, especially pp. 76–107.
4 Cervantes, El ingenioso…, edited by Murillo, vol. I, p. 118. Subsequent
references to Don Quixote are to this edition. All translations from Spanish to
English have been by the author of this chapter unless otherwise noted.
5 Solé-Leris, pp. 91–3 and Canavaggio, Cervantes, pp. 106–15.
6 Casalduero, ‘La Galatea’, p. 33.
7 Casalduero, ‘La Galatea’, p. 36.
8 Stamm, pp. 337–43.
9 Damiani, pp. 53–70.
10 Fielding, pp. xvii–xviii.
11 Close, The Romantic…, p. 95. Close’s work on the romantic approach to
Don Quixote is, of course, a book-length study. Readers requiring merely a brief
survey can find it in Chapter 15 of E.C. Riley’s general introduction to the novel
in his Don Quixote, pp. 174–83. Riley’s overview is as dispassionate as it is
succinct, but like Close, he is concerned with Don Quixote only.
12 Marías, p. xxiii.
13 Ortega, p. 162; original emphasis.
14 Ortega, p. 168.
15 Ortega, p. 199.
16 Gaultier, p. 23.
17 Close, The Romantic…, p. 197.
18 Castro, El pensamiento…, p. 123.
19 Castro, El pensamiento…, p. 83.
20 Castro, El pensamiento…, p. 123.
21 Castro, El pensamiento…, p. 124.
22 Riley, Don Quixote, pp. 35–61 and pp. 73–87.
23 Finello, pp. 120–1.
24 Micó, pp. 827–48.
25 Castro, Hacia Cervantes, p. 232.
26 Castro, Hacia Cervantes, p. 234.
27 Avalle-Arce, Nuevos deslindes, p. 134.
28 Dudley, pp. 355–68.
29 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, p. 52.
30 Cervantes, Novelas ejemplares, p. 52.
31 Casalduero, Sentido y forma de las Novelas ejemplares, p. 23.
32 El-Saffar, Novel to Romance…, p. 15.
33 Dunn, ‘Las Novelas ejemplares’, p. 82.
34 Riley, Cervantes’s Theory…, pp. 131–45.
35 Vega, vol. III, p. 4.
36 McKendrick, Cervantes, pp. 250–9 and 267–8.
37 Friedman, p. 103.
38 Friedman, p. 38.
39 Zimic, p. 236.
40 Casalduero, Sentido y forma del teatro de Cervantes, p. 13.
41 Wardropper, ‘Comedias’, in Suma Cervantina, p. 157.
42 Friedman, p. 59.
43 Casalduero, Sentido y forma del teatro de Cervantes, p. 25.
44 Valbuena, pp. 30–5.
45 Casalduero, Sentido y forma del teatro de Cervantes, p. 177.
46 Asensio, Suma Cervantina, p. 174.
47 Canavaggio, Cervantès dramaturge…, pp. 148–9.
48 Wilson and Moir, p. 39.
49 Byron, pp. 491–7.
50 See Chapter 21 on Viaje del Parnaso and Chapter 25 on Cervantes and
other Literary Circles.
51 See Gaos’s Introduction of Cervantes, Poesías completas…, p. 37.
52 Rivers, pp. 119–46.
53 Madariaga, pp. 81–139.
54 Madariaga, Don Quixote, pp. 121–46.
55 Johnson, pp. 135–6.
56 Johnson, p. 179.
57 Williamson, pp. 166–73.
58 Mancing, p. 167.
59 Castro, Hacia Cervantes, pp. 250–2.
60 Avalle-Arce and Riley, ‘Don Quijote’, pp. 47–59.
61 Castro, Cervantes…, pp. 42–82.
62 Dunn, Spanish Picaresque…, pp. 208–20.
63 Castro, Cervantes…, p. 145.
64 Marinelli, p. 11.
65 Murillo, pp. 138–57.
66 Casalduero, Sentido y forma de Los Trabajos…, pp. 283–5.
67 Avalle-Arce, Nuevos deslindes…, pp. 63–5.
68 Forcione, Cervantes’s Christian…, p. 85.
69 Río, I, p. 503.
Chapter 31
Cervantine Criticism since 2000 and
into the Future
Bruce R. Burningham
Illinois State University
The past two decades have seen an explosion in Cervantes scholarship.
Indeed, it would perhaps not be an exaggeration to suggest that the last
twenty years arguably represent the Golden Age of Cervantes criticism.
Such a declaration may seem a bit rash to readers who rightly revere
the pioneering work of Marcelino Menéndez Pelayo, Miguel de
Unamuno, José Ortega y Gasset, Ramón Menéndez Pidal, Rudolph
Schevill, and others. And this is not to mention the important work of
later twentieth-century scholars like John J. Allen, Juan Bautista
Avalle-Arce, Jean Canavaggio, Américo Castro, Anthony Close, Anne
Cruz, Manuel Durán, Ruth El Saffar, Alban Forcione, Mary Gaylord,
Michael Gerli, Carroll Johnson, Francisco Márquez Villanueva, Luis
Murillo, James Parr, Helena Percas de Ponseti, Augustin Redondo,
Francisco Rico, and Martín de Riquer (among many, many others far
too numerous to mention here). But consider the numbers. A recent
search of the Modern Language Association (MLA) online International
Bibliography reveals a significant development. As of April 2017, the
total number of entries listed for the subject heading ‘Miguel de
Cervantes’ was 7,611. Of these, slightly less than half (i.e. 3,769) were
published during the roughly 100 years between 1888 and 1996, while
slightly more than half (i.e. 3,968) have been published during the last
two decades. In other words, during the last twenty years, the body of
Cervantes knowledge has more than doubled, greatly expanding our
variety of critical perspectives along the way; this is undoubtedly why
the Modern Language Association took the unusual step in 2015 of
issuing a completely new ‘second edition’ of its Approaches to Teaching
Cervantes’s Don Quixote (co-edited by James Parr and Lisa Vollendorf)
to stand alongside the original 1984 first edition.
Such exponential growth in the sheer volume of Cervantes
scholarship is likely due to several factors. The first of these is the
obvious rise of the research university in the mid-twentieth century,
which compelled scholars to publish in always greater and greater
numbers. The second is the arrival of the ‘information revolution’ that
also occurred between 1950 and 2000—with the significant coming
online of the worldwide web in the 1990s—which made it easier for
researchers not only to access previous scholarship, but also to produce
and disseminate new scholarship via an ever-growing network of
scholarly venues, including electronic journals. The third is the series of
commemorations held during the last quarter-century that not only
marked the ‘centennial’ anniversary of one or another historical event
related to the Iberian Peninsula, but also contributed to the current
wave of post-conference publications.
Any attempt to survey adequately the totality of this vast scholarly
terrain in the space of these few pages would be impossible. What I
propose, therefore, is an approach that is both more modest and more
manageable. In what follows, I will outline what I think are the major
new and emerging trends in Cervantes scholarship since 2000,
highlighting and glossing specific publications only as necessary to
provide context for the bigger picture. Before doing so, however,
several caveats are in order. First, while much of what follows will
largely apply to Don Quixote above all (given this particular text’s
unparalleled prominence in the field), it is also germane to the rest of
Cervantes’s works. Moreover, various developments in one area often
overlap with those in another. Second, given that this brief survey in no
way attempts to comprise an exhaustive treatment of everything
published since 2000, my decision to highlight certain trends to the
exclusion of others should not be understood to mean that I consider
those excluded approaches to be unimportant; only that the limited
space allotted for this essay obliges me to leave out a great many things
that I would otherwise include. Indeed, a great number of the several
thousand books and articles published on Cervantes since the turn of
the new millennium continue to cultivate fields—from philology to
narratology, from new historicism to cultural studies, from genre
theory to gender theory—that were established in previous decades.1
Third, and in that regard, I will candidly acknowledge here that my
particular selection of topics and scholarly texts is somewhat
idiosyncratic, and that as I survey the field, I necessarily focus on those
trends that have attracted my own attention. A different Cervantes
scholar undertaking a similar overview of the field might very well
organize this material differently.2
Across the Centuries
The first major new trend of the past two decades relates to what I
would call an ‘across the centuries’ framework. This trend, of course,
grew out of the several Cervantine celebrations mentioned above,
beginning in 2005 with the 400th anniversary of the publication of Part
I of Don Quixote. Many of the resulting ‘across the centuries’
publications consist of edited volumes of collected essays that were
perhaps delivered at one or another symposium dedicated to this
commemorative year. For instance, John Gabriele’s 1605–2005: Don
Quixote Across the Centuries and Carroll Johnson’s Don Quijote Across
Four Centuries: 1605–2005 both grew out of conferences held at the
College of Wooster (Ohio) and UCLA, respectively. Other significant
volumes include Zenia Sacks’s Da Silva’s Don Quixote: The First 400
Years, Klaus-Dieter Ertler and Alejandro Rodríguez Díaz’s El Quijote
hoy: La riqueza de su recepción [The Quixote Today: The Richness of Its
Reception], and Augustin Redondo’s Releyendo el Quijote, cuatrocientos
años después [Re-Reading the Quixote, Four Hundred Years Later].3
I mention this particular trend first because it is indicative of a
certain zeitgeist related to our current era of Cervantes scholarship.
When the 300th anniversary of Don Quixote rolled around at the
beginning of the twentieth century, there was really no worldwide
academic Cervantes ‘industry’ to speak of. Indeed, while it is certainly
true that the MLA International Bibliography is far from comprehensive,
this database nevertheless lists a total of only eighteen scholarly articles
published on Cervantes between 1900 and 1920, three of which were
written by Rudolph Schevill, and none of which seem directly related
to the 300th anniversary. Spaniards, of course, were intensely
interested in the 1905 anniversary, but Spain’s collective interest was
largely wrapped up in the project of the ‘Generation of 1898’ and had a
great deal to do with Spanish nationalism in the aftermath of the
Spanish-American war. By comparison, our current interest in all things
Cervantine is much more focused on the question of what it means to
read Cervantes in a globalized world defined by instant—and incessant
—communication. Still, as both José Manuel Lucía Megías’s recent
Cervantes biographies and numerous journalistic media stories on the
excavation of Cervantes’s mortal remains attest, there is still a great
deal of public interest in the man and his times.4
Cervantes and the Americas
Closely related to the ‘across the centuries’ trend is one that also
emerged in the wake of a significant commemoration year: the 1992
fifth centennial of Christopher Columbus’s first voyage to the Americas.
As Cervantes scholars turned their attention to the first of many
Cervantine milestones between 2005 and 2017, their thoughts still
lingered on the continued impact of the Columbian ‘encounter’ on both
the world of Cervantes and on our contemporary culture. In this regard,
several post-2000 ‘Cervantes and the Americas’ symposia and
publications grew out of this still-relevant topic. Notable works here
include Diana de Armas Wilson’s Cervantes, the Novel, and the New
World, which not only anticipated later works like Julio Vélez-Sainz
and Nieves Romero-Díaz’s Cervantes and/on/in the New World, but also
participated in the larger academic conversation about ‘transatlantic’
studies, particularly in the United States where the previous four
decades had seen the growing importance of Latin American literature
and culture within US Hispanism.5 Taking as a point of departure
Cervantes’s stated interest in 1590 in travelling to the New World,6 this
‘Americas’ scholarship examines the many ways in which, to quote
Wilson, ‘the Cervantine novel had multiple ties to the New World
colonial adventure’,7 from the triangular relationship between Don
Quixote, the medieval romances of chivalry, and the early crónicas de
indias [chronicles of the Indies] to the representation of what Michael
Armstrong-Roche has called ‘Europe as Barbaric New World’ in Persiles
y Sigismunda;8 from the discourse of seafaring empire in the ‘Enchanted
Bark’ episode of Don Quixote9 to Don Quixote as an important
character, as Rogelio Miñana has observed, in the contemporary social
justice street theatre of São Paolo, Brazil.10 Closely related are also
several publications on cartography and Cervantes, including (among
others) Simone Pinet’s Archipelagoes: Insular Fictions from Chivalric
Romance to the Novel.11
Cervantes, Islam, and the Mediterranean
Another trend, one that emerged due to unexpected historical events, is
the intense focus dedicated to the Islamic world in the wake of the
terrorist attacks in New York on 11 September 2001 and the
subsequent attacks in Madrid on 11 March 2004. For Hispanists in
general, such a focus—which forms part of the larger field of ‘alterity
studies’—has played out in an examination of Al-Andalus and its
cultural impact on the Spanish-speaking world. For Cervantes scholars
in particular, as with the backdrop of the ‘Columbian encounter’ that
informs the aforementioned work on the New World, this focus on
Islam has often resulted in an analysis of various Muslim characters in
Cervantes’s works (not the least of which for Don Quixote is Cide
Hamete Benengeli, but also the protagonist of the ‘Captive’s Tale’ in
Part I and of Ricote in Part II). Works like Ruth Fine and Santiago
López Navia’s Cervantes y las religiones, as well as several articles by
Luce López Baralt, Carlos Mata Indurain, and Michael McGaha, are
important examples.12 Also important are those scholarly works that
explore Cervantes’s own personal relationship to Islam through his five
years of captivity in Algeria. María Antonia Garcés’s ground-breaking
Cervantes in Algiers: A Captive’s Tale is certainly one of the centrepieces
of the turn to Islam, but so too is Barbara Fuchs’s pioneering work in
Mimesis and Empire (which connects the topic of Islam to the topic of
the Americas in its analysis of the construction of European identities)
and in Fuchs’s recent translations of Cervantes’s plays, Los baños de
Argel and La gran Sultana.13 If the horrors of the Holocaust can be said
to have given rise, at least partially, to a new interest in Conversos after
World War II, the horrific events now called 9–11 and 11–M,
respectively, have certainly had a profound impact on the direction of
Cervantes scholarship in the early twenty-first century.
Closely related to this focus on Islam is the emergence of
‘Mediterranean studies’ in Cervantes scholarship. Obviously, Spain’s
immediate contact with the Islamic world occurred within the
Mediterranean 
basin. 
Thus, 
as 
Javier 
Irigoyen-García’s 
work
demonstrates, most of the Jews and Muslims expelled from Spain
beginning in 1492 and culminating in 1609 travelled into various parts
of North Africa and the Middle East against the backdrop of the
military conflict between the Spanish Habsburgs and the Ottoman
Empire.14 As Garcés notes, ‘With the conquest of Granada in 1492 by
Ferdinand and Isabella, the Strait of Gibraltar became the southern
Spanish frontier, certainly an insufficient boundary between the
Christian kingdom of the Iberian peninsula and the Islamic world of
North Africa.’15 Within just such a geopolitical and cultural context,
where pirates engaged in a basin-wide strategy of taking political
prisoners in order to ransom them, the modern notion of ‘the
Mediterranean’ was born. William Childers reminds us, for instance,
that Christian captives ‘came from as far away as Stockholm, but most
were from the northern shore of the Mediterranean’.16 And Garcés
herself points out that the commander of the three pirate galleys that
captured Cervantes and transported him to Algiers was an Albanian
renegade whose lieutenant was of Greek origin.17 For scholars
interested in this emerging early modern Mediterranean world,
Frederick de Armas reminds us that Don Quixote ‘foregrounds the clash
of civilizations as both a literary clash and a nuanced negotiation’.18
Indeed, for many scholars, the figure of Cide Hamete Benengeli
embodies the early modern amalgamation of Mediterranean cultures;
he is the epitome of what Childers calls Spain’s ‘internal colonization’
of the Iberian Peninsula.19
Modernity and the Novel
In his book 1493: Uncovering the World Columbus Created, Charles Mann
argues that our now-omnipresent ‘age of globalization’ really came into
being with the Spanish and Portuguese conquest of the New World and
with the international markets that these two empires established
across the globe, from the Philippines to Mexico City to Seville, from
Goa to Lisbon to Rio de Janeiro and all points in between. For Mann,
the Columbian encounter was ‘one of the establishing events of the
modern world’.20 Thus, one of the other major new trends to emerge in
Cervantes scholarship in the wake of our collective post-1992 focus on
500 years of European colonialism and imperialism is the question of
‘modernity’, and more precisely where Cervantes’s work not only fits
within the emerging early modern period, but also how it contributes
to the arrival of modernity itself. And this exploration of Cervantine
modernity divides itself into two interrelated modes: Cervantes’s work
as a reflection of the sixteenth century’s emerging modernity and Don
Quixote in particular as the ‘first modern novel’.21 Rachel Schmidt, in
her 2011 book, Forms of Modernity: Don Quixote and Modern Theories of
the Novel (and particularly in her chapter titled ‘Don Quixote and the
Problem of Modernity’), engages both modes simultaneous. On one
hand, Schmidt notes Don Quixote’s thematic preoccupation with
anachronism—what she calls ‘Don Quixote’s clash with modernity’—
and argues that ‘Don Quixote is conscious of living in a new age, a time
that is, in important ways, modern’.22 On the other hand, Schmidt
deliberately problematizes the whole idea that Don Quixote is the ‘first
modern novel’. ‘What is a novel?’ she asks, ‘what constitutes modernity
in relationship to prose?’, and why choose Don Quixote ‘as the
progenitor of such a diverse and complicated genre?’.23
Harold Bloom, of course, who credits William Shakespeare with
‘inventing’ our modern concept of ‘the human’ in the tendency of
Shakespeare’s dramatic characters to overhear themselves and
subsequently change,24 argues that Cervantes’s crucial contribution to
the invention of the ‘modern’ lies in his creation of what Mikhail
Bakhtin would alternatively call a larger, discursive ‘dialogism’ or
‘heteroglossia’ in his monumental novel.25 Says Bloom: ‘Don Quixote
and Sancho Panza are each other’s ideal conversationalist; they change
by listening to each other.’26 For Eric Graf, Cervantes’s ‘famous
“perspectivism”’ must be understood ‘as a linguistic, aesthetic, [and]
philosophical technique’ intimately connected to ‘what are arguably
some of the most important values of modern civilization: social
tolerance, feminism, secularism, and materialism’.27 Likewise, David
Quint argues that ‘Cervantes mimics and charts the arrival of [the]
modern world’, such that ‘Don Quijote throughout tells and retells a
master narrative of early-modern Europe: the movement from
feudalism to the new order of capitalism that will become the realistic
domain of the modern novel, the genre this book does so much to
invent’.28 Indeed, Carroll Johnson closely tracks Cervantes’s material
representation of early modern capitalism in his ground-breaking book
Cervantes and the Material World, where he identifies ‘the socioeconomic
issues present in Cervantes’s text, and then [provides] enough “thick
description” of the relevant historical context to enable a discussion of
the fictional text within the context’,29 from Sancho’s request for a
regular salary in Don Quixote to Monipodio’s allegorical function as a
figure of monopoly capitalism in Rinconete y Cortadillo.30 Coming from
a less materialist perspective, William Egginton argues in his 2016 book
The Man Who Invented Fiction that Cervantes did not just invent the
modern novel, but also ‘ushered in the modern world’.31 For Egginton,
the duality and dialogism most important to Don Quixote are found
within the book’s readers themselves, who ‘occupy two opposed
identities simultaneously: a naïve reader who believes what he is being
told, and a savvy one who knows it is untrue’.32
Science and Technology
Closely related to discussions of Cervantes’s impact on the rise of
modernity are two other scholarly trends. The first of these focuses its
attention on the historical and intellectual context of Cervantes’s works,
with specific attention to questions of science and technology.
Cervantes, of course, was a contemporary of both Galileo and Kepler,
and all three worked in the shadow of Copernicus. Noting that Galileo
owned a copy of Lorenzo Franciosini’s Italian translation of Don
Quixote, Crystal Hall explores the way in which ‘Galileo’s constant
antagonistic dialogue with the written tradition of Ptolemy…and
Aristotelian Peripatetics is akin to Cervantes’ juxtaposition of the “old”
world of chivalry and his contemporary, late-sixteenth-century Spain’.33
For Hall, Galileo is somewhat analogous to Don Quixote: he ‘finds
himself at a point of collision between the book culture that described
the traditional narrative, and the world of our physical senses. When
investigation was aided by new instruments, the sensible world often
appeared quite different from the one described in books.’34 Cory Reed,
for his part, explores this very phenomenon (i.e. the shock of new ideas
and technologies on traditional culture) when he argues that ‘the new
Copernican cosmology’s challenge to the geocentric universe, the rise of
humanism, the development of mechanics, and the modern nation-
state’s consolidation of political power all informed not only Don
Quixote’s world but also the changing reality of seventeenth-century
Spain’.35 Likewise, both Grace Burton and Daniel Lorca have analysed
the impact of—and, at times, resistance to—the modern, scientific
‘scepticism’ of authority ushered in by Copernicus.36 And this is in
addition to an essay like B. W. Ife’s ‘Air Travel in Cervantes’ or Chad
Gasta’s ‘Cervantes’s Theory of Relativity in Don Quixote’, where Gasta
argues that while Cervantes’s novel is most certainly not a direct
precursor to Albert Einstein’s theory of relativity, it does contain
nonetheless 
elements 
that 
anticipate 
twentieth-century 
notions
regarding what Gasta calls ‘the mutability and malleability of space,
motion, and time’.37
The Neo-Baroque and Postmodernism
The second of these two interconnected ‘modernity’ trends relates to
Cervantes’s impact on what is often called the ‘neo-baroque’, but which
also involves ‘postmodernism’. While technically published in 1999,
Anne Cruz and Carroll Johnson’s Cervantes and his Postmodern
Constituencies really marks the beginning of our post-2000 interest in
the topic. Álvaro Ramírez, for instance, notes the Baudrillardian
hyperreality at the heart of Don Quixote’s three sallies, in which the
protagonist ‘enters the realm of simulation and the unbound sign,
where signification rules’.38 Likewise, in his study of mise-en-abyme in
Don Quixote, John Gabriele argues that ‘Like present-day postmodern
fiction, Cervantes’s novel challenges the notion of authority, stresses
the plurality of form, and undermines the notion of fixity’.39
Meanwhile, in a series of co-written essays, Barbara Simerka and
Christopher Weimer examine the relationship between Don Quixote and
several postmodern films, including Charlie Kaufman’s Being John
Malkovich and Adaptation.40 As Simerka and Weimer argue, the
‘homologies’ between Cervantes and Kaufman ‘provide a striking
example of how the aesthetic and epistemological preoccupations
central to cultural production in the early modern period, during which
the ideological constructs of modernity first appeared as emergent
discourses, have returned to manifest themselves anew in popular art
forms of the postmodern period’.41 And this is not to mention my own
work in Tilting Cervantes or that of David Castillo and William Egginton
in their 2017 book Medialogies: Reading Reality in the Age of Inflationary
Media.
Closer to the original Spanish context, Palmar Álvarez Blanco
examines the Cervantine essence underlying much contemporary
Spanish fiction, which reveals ‘the logic behind the creation of a new
paradigm of reality’, a paradigm that is ‘initially described as a
spectacle [but which] ends up occupying the space of everyday life’.42
Likewise, Philip Swanson’s study of the postmodern, Cervantine logic
inherent in Latin American detective fiction reveals what he calls the
way in which the genre ‘problematizes’ both reason and reality.43
Meanwhile, other Cervantine scholarship tied to our current excavation
of the baroque includes Rogelio Miñana’s Monstruos que hablan
[Monsters that Speak], where he insists that the duality inherent in
baroque monstrosity is crucial to understanding the ‘multiplicity’ of the
modern world,44 and David Castillo’s Baroque Horrors, where he argues
that ‘The exceptionality of monsters could lead to a further questioning
of norms and social hierarchies, [such that monsters] could be seen as
material evidence or living proof of the inadequacy of inherited
knowledge and social structures’.45
Transnational and International Cervantes
Such developments in the study of Cervantes’s connection to the neo-
baroque and postmodernism hint at yet another major trend in
Cervantes scholarship during the past two decades: ‘international’
approaches to this most ‘Spanish’ of authors. Childers does a wonderful
job of announcing the essence of this international project (which is
‘international’ in terms of both scholarly focus and scholarly
production) in the opening pages of Transnational Cervantes, where he
says: ‘This book reconfigures Cervantes’s place in literary history. Its
transnationalizing strategy simultaneously disassociates his work from
European post-Enlightenment modernity and connects early modern
Spain with other temporalities and geographies’.46 From this point of
departure, Childers goes on to examine everything from Cervantes’s
impact on the development of Latin American magic realism to
Cervantes’s at-times thorny connection to the Chicano movement.47
Likewise, in a collection of essays titled International Don Quixote, co-
edited by Theo D’haen and Reindert Dhondt, a truly international
group of scholars examines Cervantes’s impact on works as disparate as
those of Ramón Sender, Jorge Luis Borges, Mark Twain, and Paul
Auster; and on topics as wide-ranging as the Spanish Civil War,
European operatic traditions, and even the stories of Mexico’s
Subcomandate Marcos.48 Meanwhile, Jorge Latorre, Antonio Martínez,
and Oleksandr Pronkevich’s volume of collected essays titled El telón
rasgado: El Quijote como puente cultural con el mundo soviético y
postsoviético [The Torn Curtain: The Quixote as Cultural Bridge to the
Soviet and Post-Soviet World] focuses on the impact of Cervantes within
the cultures of what used to be called the ‘Eastern Block’. Farther to the
East, Shyama Prasad Ganguly, Preeti Pant, and others have examined
Cervantes’s works within the context of Indian culture. And at the edge
of the Pacific Rim, a 2016 conference featuring several papers on the
intersection of early modern Spain and China was recently held in
Beijing to commemorate the 400th anniversary of Cervantes’s death.49
One notable sub-trend within this ‘international’ approach to
Cervantes is a multifaceted examination of Cervantes’s influence on
Anglo-Saxon culture (defined as both specifically British and
internationally English-speaking). Like International Don Quixote, the
collection of essays titled Cervantes y el ámbito anglosajón [Cervantes and
the Anglo-Saxon Ambit], edited by Diego Martínez Torrón and Bernd
Dietz, brings together an array of scholars who trace the connections
between Cervantes and authors like Herman Melville, Thomas
Pynchon, Daniel Defoe, Jane Austin, George Eliot, and William
Congreve. Likewise, the various essays brought together by J. A. G.
Ardila in The Cervantean Heritage: Reception and Influence of Cervantes in
Britain focus on topics like ‘Cervantes and the British Novel’ and
‘Cervantes and the British Theatre’.50 Alongside such ‘ecumenical’
collections that broadly span a number of intersecting geographies are
those that are much more delimited in focus, such as Dale Randall and
Jackson Boswell’s Cervantes in Seventeenth-Century England: The Tapestry
Turned in which they specifically focus on the ‘reception history’ of the
first generation of English-speaking readers who came into contact with
Cervantes’s works.51 More specialized still are works like Daniel
Eisenberg’s several publications—chief among them an edited cluster in
the Fall 2003 issue of Cervantes—that examine John Bowle and the
lasting impact of his 1781 edition of Don Quixote.52
Within this Anglo-Saxon sub-trend, there is an even more specific
sub-sub-trend related to the rediscovery/excavation/reconstruction of
Shakespeare’s so-called ‘lost play’ Cardenio. This ‘Cardenio’ topic in and
of itself has generated at least fifty-six books, collected volumes, and
articles since 1996. More recent interest in this lost play is the result
not just of what Roger Chartier and Janet Lloyd call a general ‘Cardenio
fever’, but also of the 400th anniversary in 2016 of the deaths of both
Shakespeare and Cervantes, which impelled scholars to find tangible
ways of connecting these two great pillars of the European literary
tradition.53 Eventually, the Royal Shakespeare Company staged a
production of Cardenio (adapted from Lewis Theobald’s Double
Falsehood) in spring 2011. And a staged reading of Stephen Greenblatt
and Charles Mee’s own modern adaptation of Cardenio was presented at
the Newberry Library in Chicago in April 2016 as part of the
Newberry’s own commemoration of the deaths of these two canonical
writers.54
Cervantes and Film and Media Studies
Overlapping both the neo-baroque and international approaches to
Cervantes is an explosion in scholarship on Cervantes’s connection to
film and media studies.55 Indeed, during the past twenty years, nearly
100 scholarly works have been published on this topic alone, including
three doctoral dissertations written since 2005.56 Many—particularly
those co-written by Simerka and Weimer on postmodern film—have
been discussed above. However, not all such film studies necessarily
focus on Cervantes as a precursor to postmodernism. For instance, an
article by Antonio Carreño-Rodríguez, inventively titled ‘Costello +
Panza = Costanza: Paradigmatic Pairs in Don Quixote and American
Popular Culture’, examines the comedic silhouette of a tall, thin Don
Quixote and a short, stout Sancho Panza as precursors to such comedy
duos as Laurel and Hardy, Abbot and Costello, and Kramer and George
Costanza in the television series Seinfeld. Likewise, Will McMorran
traces Cervantes’s influence on the character of Caractacus in the 1968
film Chitty Chitty Bang Bang, while David Castillo (somewhat echoing
Carreño-Rodriguez’s approach) explores the Cervantine subtext of such
‘road movies’ as Easy Rider, Thelma and Louise, and Motorcycle Diaries.57
Meanwhile, Terry Gilliam’s 2018 film The Man Who Killed Don Quixote
(along with Keith Fulton and Louis Pepe’s Lost in La Mancha, which
famously documents the total collapse of Gilliam’s first attempt at the
project) has generated no fewer than twelve essays since 2003,
including one by Julia Domínguez, who examines what she calls the
notable similarities between Gilliam and Don Quixote,58 and Sidney
Donnell, who asks whether Lost in La Mancha is, generically speaking,
the first film of its kind—what he calls ‘the first documentary in the
history of cinema about the unmaking of a movie’.59 Other such
scholarly publications within the topic of Cervantes and film and media
studies include (among numerous others): David Rudrum’s article
‘Narrativity and Performativity: From Cervantes to Star Trek’; Jorge
Abril Sánchez’s examination of the subtext of Sun Tzu’s The Art of War
in Ah Gan’s 2010 Chinese adaptation of Don Quixote; Elizabeth
McMorris and Isabel Bohrer’s ‘Cine, nacionalismo y literatura: La
representación de Don Quijote’ [‘Film, Nationalism, and Literature: The
Representation of Don Quixote’], which focuses on cinematic
adaptations of Don Quixote by Georg Wilhelm Pabst, Rafael Gil, and
Grigori Kozintsev; David Castillo’s ‘Don Quixote and Political Satire:
Cervantine Lessons from Sacha Baron Cohen and Stephen Colbert’; and
Christopher Weimer’s ‘Leaping New Media in a Single Bound: The
Quixotic Would-Be Superhero in Contemporary Graphic Fiction and
Film’.
Within the realm of film studies, perhaps no monograph covers more
Cervantine territory than Robert Stam’s 2005 Literature through Film:
Realism, Magic, and the Art of Adaptation, which follows up on Stam’s
influential 1985 book Reflexivity in Film and Literature: From Don
Quixote to Jean-Luc Godard. Beginning with a chapter titled ‘A Cervantic
Prelude: From Don Quixote to Postmodernism’, and concluding with a
chapter titled ‘Full Circle’ From Cervantes to Magic Realism’, Stam’s
2005 book not only provides an overview of Cervantes’s novel and its
importance to the history of Western narrative, but also glosses a
number of cinematic adaptations of Don Quixote, including Kozintsev’s
1957 Russian adaptation—which Stam says, ‘highlights both the novel’s
comic and burlesque features as well as its tragic and philosophical
aspect’60—and Orson Welles’s own unfinished—‘relentlessly reflexive’61
—cinematic adaptation (which was mostly filmed during the mid- to
late-1950s, and then posthumously ‘finished’ by Jesús Franco in 1992,
who edited Welles’s raw footage into a complete feature-length film).
Stam’s book ties these various strands together by tracing significant
aspects of Latin American magic realism back to Cervantes, particularly
in several Latin American films, like Joaquim Pedro de Andrade’s 1968
Brazilian film Macunaíma and Paul Leduc’s 1988 film Barroco.62
Cervantes and Visual Culture
While not directly related to film studies, another recent trend in
Cervantes scholarship is the rise of visual culture as an important
interpretive frame, beginning in 1999 with the publication of Rachel
Schmidt’s Critical Images: The Canonization of Don Quixote through
Illustrated Editions of the Eighteenth Century. Important too is the related
notion of ekphrasis.63 Frederick de Armas, of course, is the recognized
‘dean’ of the ekphrastic school of Cervantes criticism, and has not only
published several important scholarly works on the topic (notably,
Ekphrasis in the Age of Cervantes), but has also been instrumental in
training and mentoring a generation of young scholars interested in
visual approaches to literary study.64 Indeed, the founding of the Early
Modern Image and Text Society (EMIT) in 2004 largely grew out of de
Armas’s 2003 National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH) seminar
on the topic, as did Ana Laguna’s monograph Cervantes and the Pictorial
Imagination. Unrelated to de Armas’s seminar, but also extremely
important, are online databases of images such as José Manuel Lucía
Megías’s Banco de imágenes del Quijote (1605–1915) [Image Bank of the
Quixote (1605–1915)] and Eduardo Urbina’s Proyecto Cervantes
[Cervantes Project] at Texas A&M University, both of which provide
worldwide access to thousands of visual images related to Cervantes,
his works, and his impact on visual culture.65
Cervantes and the Body
Another major trend in Cervantes scholarship since 2000 is one that
might be called the ‘corporeal turn’ in so far as it focuses on issues
related to the materiality of the body. Such a corporeal turn certainly
represents a continuation of several approaches that pre-date the turn
of the new millennium, but it also represents a real paradigmatic shift.
Publications emerging from this area of research can be grouped into at
least three broad categories: gender and sexuality, cognitive theory
(including studies of affect and emotion), and performance studies.
Feminist approaches to Cervantes, with a particular attention to the
representation of women, have been foundational within Cervantes
criticism at least since the early 1980s. Indeed, the MLA International
Bibliography lists some thirty combined publications between 1980 and
1999 focusing on Marcela and Dorotea alone. Commenting on the
distinguished place of Marcela in the work of numerous feminist
scholars, Lisa Vollendorf remarks: ‘Her rejection of marital, sexual, and
gender norms awakens readers to the implications and intricacies of
Cervantes’s depiction of social control.’66 Recent feminist scholarship
on Cervantes includes monographs like Martha García’s La función de
los personajes femeninos en Don Quijote de la Mancha y su relevancia en
la narrativa [The Function of the Female Characters in Don Quixote de la
Mancha and their Relevance in the Narrative]—which includes chapters
on Marcela, Dorotea, Zoraida, and the Duchess—as well as numerous
article-length studies by Marina Brownlee, Anne Cruz, Christine Garst-
Santos, Rosilie Hernández, Robert Lauer, Stacey Aronson Parker, and
Harry Vélez Quiñones (among others).67 For her part, Carolyn Nadeau
examines all the major female characters in Don Quixote both in
relation to what she calls Cervantes’s more marginal ‘women of the
prologue’—i.e. ‘prostitutes, witches, and sorceresses’—and to the
classical models of female representation from which Cervantes drew.68
Likewise, Enriqueta Zafra turns her attention precisely to the discourse
of prostitution in Don Quixote (and elsewhere) in order to argue that
within the context of early modern Spanish society, Cervantes’s attitude
regarding prostitution is at the very least ‘ambiguous’.69 Meanwhile,
Mercedes Alcalá-Galán’s ‘Las piernas de la duquesa: Práxis médica y
claves hermenéuticas en el Quijote de 1605’ [‘The Duchess’s Legs:
Medical Praxis and Hermeneutic Clues in the Quixote of 1605’] not only
forms part of the recent focus on science in Cervantes, but also provides
a brilliant analysis of the way in which the early modern patriarchy
imposed its will on the body of even an upper-class woman like the
Duchess. Moreover, Isabel Navas Ocaña and Theresa Ann Sears have
both written more broadly on feminist approaches to Cervantes.70
These studies that focus generally on the representation of women
are complemented by a number of studies focusing more specifically on
the question of desire. Of these, works like Sarah Malfatti’s ‘El deseo de
ser si misma’ [‘The Desire to Be Herself’] and Ashley Hope Pérez’s ‘Into
the Dark Triangle of Desire’ revisit and update Rene Girard’s well-
known essay on ‘triangular desire’ in the intercalated tale El curioso
impertinente. Others, like Anne Cruz’s ‘Psyche and Gender’, bring a
Lacanian perspective to bear on the question.71 Meanwhile, works like
those of Peter Dunn, Javier Irigoyen-García, and Minni Sawhney
examine the issue of desire in works beyond Don Quixote,72 while still
others, like those of Leyla Rouhi, Eduardo Ruiz, and Rachel Schmidt,
trace the relationship between colonial desire and an Orientalized
other.73 Alongside such article-length works, Adrienne Martín’s
monographic study An Erotic Philology of Golden Age Spain, which
complements elements of Zafra’s work, argues that ‘Cervantes’s erotic
worlds…are distant from those sordid environments inhabited by the
social outcasts who embody the prostitute-protagonists of the female
picaresque novel’. For Martín, these ‘virtuous unvirtuous women’ in
Cervantes can be read as a ‘genial literary alternative to the
overwhelmingly antifeminist and negative female picaresque’.74
Building on the ground-breaking work of Judith Butler, and working
within a broader critical framework that acknowledges a non-binary
gender continuum, scholars like Sherry Velasco, Mar Martínez Góngora,
and José Cartagena-Calderón have explored ‘performativity’ and the
construction of masculinity in Cervantes’s works.75 Of the cross-dressed
bearded ‘lady’ in the Duke and Duchess episode of Don Quixote, Velasco
notes: ‘The “grotesque” images of the bearded cross-dressed steward,
and the beardless yet mannish cross-dressed page as Dulcinea
undoubtedly enact the monsterization of male femininity so feared and
criticized during Cervantes’s life.’76 Likewise, Werner Altmann and
Harry Vélez Quiñones bring queer theory to bear on a number
Cervantes’s texts, including El licenciado Vidriera and El cerco de
Numancia.77
Alongside questions of gender and sexuality, a second important
trend within the ‘corporeal turn’ is the emergence of cognitive
approaches to Cervantes’s works. Howard Mancing has done much to
spearhead this particular school of criticism, although Catherine
Connor, Isabel Jaén, Barbara Simerka, and Julien Simon (among
others) have all played a major role in its development.78 And while
many discrete articles and books related to Cervantes have been
published in the area of cognitive studies, a ‘special cluster’ in the
spring 2012 issue of Cervantes exists as this approach’s deliberate
‘manifesto’, as Simon notes in his introduction to the cluster:
‘“Cognitive Cervantes” represents the first effort to bring together the
work of scholars examining Hispanic literature, and more specifically
Cervantes’s writings, in relation to human cognition.’79 Overlapping
this explicitly ‘cognitive approach’, another approach that focuses on
the mind-body connection in Cervantes involves studies that examine
affect and emotion. New work in this area includes not only at least
three recent dissertation projects,80 but also several articles by
established and emerging scholars alike, including Lilián Camacho
Morfín, José Manuel González, Steven Hutchinson, Ryan Schmitz,
Steven Wagschal, and Donald Wehrs.81
Cervantes, Performance, and Theatre
Scholarly works that also fall within the ‘corporeal turn’ are those that
involve the question of performance and its relationship to Cervantes’s
theatre. Most prominent among the several post-2000 publications on
Cervantine theatre as not just literary drama but as scripts embedded
within a living, corporeal performance tradition are Jesús González
Maestro’s 2000 monograph La escena imaginaria: Poética del teatro de
Miguel de Cervantes [The Imagined Scene: The Poetics of Cervantes’s
Theatre] and his 2017 monographic issue of Anuario de estudios
cervantinos titled Cervantes en escena: Nuevas interpretaciones del teatro
cervantino [Cervantes on Stage: New Interpretations of Cervantine Theatre].
So too is Melanie Henry’s The Signifying Self: Cervantine Drama as
Counter-Perspective Aesthetic, as are numerous articles by Mercedes
Alcalá-Galán, Ellen Anderson, Michael Armstrong-Roche, Héctor Brioso
Santos, Moisés Castillo, Alejandro García Reidy, Aaron M. Kahn,
Abraham Madroñal, Adrián Sáez, María Ascensión Sáenz, Dawn Smith,
Kenneth Stackhouse, and Jonathan Thacker.82 Meanwhile, Esther
Fernández, whose overall work focuses more broadly on early modern
Spanish theatre within the context of production and performance, has
contributed significantly to our appreciation of Cervantes’s theatre as
theatre.83 Moreover, Michael Scham’s Lector Ludens broadens our
understanding of performance to include games and play, both as part
of the representation of leisure activities in Cervantes’s literary works
and in the literary works themselves as an important aspect of early
modern ludic culture.84
Into the Future
In an overview that could easily go on for dozens and dozens of pages
still, I will conclude by briefly looking toward the future by touching
on a handful of current trends that are likely to continue to develop in
the coming years.
One of these trends relates to the now-established field of law and
literature, and to a concomitant focus on ethics and politics. Susan
Byrne’s Law and History in Cervantes’s Don Quixote and Roberto
González Echevarriá’s Love and the Law in Cervantes both make
important contributions to our understanding of the relationship
between early modern legal discourse and the rise of the novel as a
genre. Anthony Cascardi’s Cervantes, Literature and the Discourse of
Politics and Steven Hutchinson’s Economía ética en Cervantes [Ethical
Economy in Cervantes] represent major monographic contributions to
our understanding of politics and ethics,85 as do several articles by Luis
Avilés, Luis Corteguera, and Paul Lewis-Smith.86 Important too are
several studies on court culture, such as Ignacio López Alemany’s
‘Courting Don Quixote: An Aulic Frame of Reading’ and Ryan Schmitz’s
‘Sancho’s Courtly Performance: Discreción and the Art of Conversation
in the Ducal Palace Episodes of Don Quijote II’, which examine the
intersection of law, politics, and ethics within the context of early
modern Spanish government.
A second emerging trend is the impact of ‘animal studies’ on
Cervantes scholarship. To date, John Beusterien’s monographic study,
Canines in Cervantes and Velázquez: An Animal Studies Reading of Early
Modern Spain, is the most concentrated published foray into this area.
But Adrienne Martín’s numerous articles and a forthcoming book
project on animals both in Cervantes and on the early modern Spanish
stage represent a real pioneering contribution to the field.87 Important
too are several disparate articles on dogs in Cervantes’s works, such as
Anthony Cascardi’s ‘¿Qué es filosofar? A Dog’s-Eye View’, Stephen
Hessel’s ‘The Dog’s Growl: Narration in Las novelas ejemplares’, and
Patricia Manning’s ‘Present Dogs, Absent Witches: Illustration and
Interpretation of El coloquio de los perros’.
A third new trend is the increasing prominence of cultural studies
(writ large) in Cervantes scholarship. In this area, Carolyn Nadeau’s
2016 monograph titled Food Matters: Alonso Quijano’s Diet and the
Discourse of Food in Early Modern Spain represents not just a highly
innovative approach to Cervantes scholarship, but also a major
contribution to the field of ‘food studies’. As Nadeau comments: ‘This
study examines the representation of food in a multiplicity of
discourses in early modern Spain.’ As such, it ‘brings to light the
figurative significance of foodstuffs and food events in their literary,
historic, and prescriptive contexts; and elucidates on food as an
important historical cultural marker’.88 Other important cultural studies
work includes Jesús Pérez Magallón’s Cervantes, monumento de la
nación: Problemas de identidad y cultura [Cervantes, Monument of the
Nation: Problems of Identity and Culture]. Moreover, a 2016
monographic issue of eHumanista/Cervantes, edited by Mercedes Alcalá-
Galán and focusing on Persiles y Sigismunda, contains essays that
connect Cervantes to both disability studies and eco-criticism, thus
demonstrating the flexibility of Cervantes scholarship to move always
in new directions.89
Conclusion
Finally, a few comments on the information revolution are in order. I
mentioned earlier the importance of the coming online of the
worldwide web in the 1990s for the explosion of Cervantes criticism
published during the past two decades. As with everything else in
contemporary society, the emergence of the internet has had a
profound impact on the academy, such that major aspects of our
professional work now revolve around computer screens. Much of this,
of course, involves the now-easy availability of research tools and
online databases that often provide instant access to numerous PDFs of
published articles. This vast information network certainly includes
websites like ‘dialnet.unirioja’ and ‘H-Cervantes’, but it also includes
social media platforms like Facebook and others that allow Cervantes
scholars around the globe to maintain contact on a daily—and often
hourly—basis. Where once newsletters and paper flyers mailed out
through the world’s postal services were the only way to publicize calls
for papers, etc., email listservs became increasingly important in the
early 2000s as a more cost-effective and efficient mechanism for the
exchange of professional information. In the meantime, the appearance
of Facebook in 2004 made such email listservs themselves obsolete by
allowing groups like the Grupo de Investigación del Siglo de Oro
(GRISO) at the University of Navarra, ‘Estudios Medievales y del Siglo
de Oro’, and ‘Siglo de Oro: España’ (to name just a few) to set up
discrete Facebook pages where calls for papers can be disseminated and
shared, new publications can be announced, and works in progress can
be discussed and debated. In this way, social media platforms have
created an omnipresent virtual community of committed colleagues
worldwide who can engage in both asynchronous and real-time
exchanges regardless of physical location. And with such easy and
immediate access to a global community of Cervantes scholars, it is no
wonder that our collective intellectual endeavour over the past twenty
years cannot be easily—or comprehensively—summed up in just a few
short pages.
Works Cited
Abril Sánchez, Jorge. ‘Ah Gan’s Don Quixote (魔俠傳之唐吉可德, 2010): Sun
Tzu, Sun Bin, and the Warrior Spirit of the Chinese Knight of La Mancha’. In
Don Quixote: Interdisciplinary Connections, edited by Matthew D. Warshawsky
and James A. Parr (Newark: Juan de la Cuesta, 2013), pp. 107–35.
Adorno, Rolena. ‘El Quijote en América: El Carnero de Juan Rodríguez Freile’.
Foro Hispánico 40 (2010): pp. 11–50.
Alcalá Galán, Mercedes. ‘“Dios te dé salud y a mí paciencia”: Teoría del teatro
en Cervantes’. In La media semana del jardincito: Cervantes y la reescritura de los
códigos, edited by José Manuel Martín Morán (Padua: Unipress, 2002), pp.
255–75.
Alcalá Galán, Mercedes. ‘Las piernas de la duquesa: Praxis médica y claves
hermenéuticas en el Quijote de 1615’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes
Society of America 33, no. 2 (2013): pp. 11–47.
Alcalá Galán, Mercedes, ed. Si ya por atrevido no sale con las manos en la cabeza:
El legado poético del Persiles cuatrocientos años después. Monographic issue of
eHumanista/Cervantes 5 (2016): i–551.
Allen, John Jay, ed. El ingenioso hidalgo don Quijote de la Mancha, by Miguel de
Cervantes, 2 vols (Madrid: Cátedra, 2009).
Alonso, Álvaro. ‘Cervantes y los mapas: La cartografía como metáfora’. Lectura y
Signo: Revista de literatura 1 (2006): pp. 75–88.
Altmann, Werner. ‘El licenciado sale del armario: Apuntes para una lectura
queer de Miguel de Cervantes’. In El andar tierras, deseos y memorias, edited by
Jenny Haase, et al. (Iberoamericana; Vervuert, 2008), pp. 423–36.
Álvarez Blanco, Palmar. ‘Novelas pensantes: Retablos cervantinos el siglo XXI’.
Romance Quarterly 56, no. 4 (2009): pp. 266–78.
Anderson, Ellen M. ‘Mothers of Invention: Toward a Reevaluation of Cervantine
Dramatic Heroines’. Bulletin of the Comediantes 62, no. 2 (2010): pp. 1–44.
Ardila, J. A. G. The Cervantean Heritage: Reception and Influence of Cervantes in
Britain (London: Modern Humanities Research Association; Maney, 2009).
Armstrong-Roche, Michael. Cervantes’s Epic Novel: Empire, Religion, and the
Dream Life of Heroes in Persiles (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2009).
Armstrong-Roche, Michael. ‘Imperial Theater of War: Republican Virtues under
Siege in Cervantes’s Numancia’. Journal of Spanish Cultural Studies 6, no. 2
(2005): pp. 185–203.
Astrana Marín, Luis and Krzysztof Sliwa. Bibliografía de vida ejemplar y heroica
de Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra (Newark: Juan de la Cuesta, 2010).
Avilés, Luis F. ‘Expanding the Self in a Mediterranean Context: Liberality and
Deception in Cervantes’s El amante liberal’. In In and of the Mediterranean:
Medieval and Early Modern Iberian Studies, edited by Michelle Hamilton and
Nuria Silleras-Fernández (Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press, 2015), pp.
233–57.
Avilés, Luis F. ‘War and the Material Conditions for Suffering in Cervantes’s
Numancia’. In Objects of Culture in the Literature of Imperial Spain, edited by
Mary E. Barnard and Frederick A. de Armas (Toronto: University of Toronto
Press, 2013), pp. 253–76.
Bakhtin, M. M. The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essay, translated by Caryl Emerson
and Michael Holquist (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1981).
Bandera, Cesáreo. The Humble Story of Don Quixote: Reflections on the Birth of the
Modern Novel (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 2006).
Barrio Marco, José Manuel, and María José Crespo Allué. La huella de Cervantes
y del Quijote en la cultura anglosajona (Valladolid: Universidad de Valladolid,
2007).
Bearden, Elizabeth, ‘Monstrous Births and Crip Authority: Cervantes, the
Persiles, and the Representation of Disability’. eHumanista/Cervantes 5 (2016):
pp. 69–84.
Bergmann, Emilie L. ‘Martyrs and Minors: Allegories of Childhood in Cervantes’.
In Gender and Early Modern Constructions of Childhood, edited by Naomi J.
Miller and Naomi Yavneh (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2011), pp. 193–207.
Beusterien, John. Canines in Cervantes and Velázquez: An Animal Studies Reading
of Early Modern Spain (Farnham: Ashgate, 2013).
Beusterien, John. ‘Reading Cervantes: A New Virtual Reality’. Comparative
Literature Studies 43, no. 4 (2006): pp. 428–40.
Bloom, Harold. Shakespeare and the Invention of the Human (New York:
Riverhead, 1998).
Bloom, Harold. The Western Canon: The Books and School of the Ages (New York:
Harcourt Brace, 1994).
Blue, William R. and James A. Parr. ‘Don Quixote at 401’. Comparative Literature
Studies 43, no. 4 (2006): pp. 379–531.
Boruchoff, David A. ‘Free Will, the Picaresque, and the Exemplarity of
Cervantes’s Novelas ejemplares’. MLN 124, no. 2 (2009): pp. 372–403.
Boruchoff, David A. ‘On the Place of Madness, Deviance, and Eccentricity in
Don Quijote’. Hispanic Review 70, no. 1 (2002): pp. 1–23.
Bourus, Terri and Gary Taylor. The Creation and Re-Creation of Cardenio:
Performing Shakespeare, Transforming Cervantes (New York, NY: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2013).
Boyd, Stephen. A Companion to Cervantes’s Novelas Ejemplares (Woodbridge,
England: Tamesis, 2005).
Brioso Santos, Héctor. Cervantes y el mundo del teatro (Kassel: Reichenberger,
2007).
Brown, Kenneth. ‘Cervantes, vida y obra: Don Quijote y el criptojudaismo
manchego de su tiempo y entorno: Unas posibles lecciones de interpretación a
través de la documentación inquisitorial’. In Cervantes y las religiones, edited
by Ruth Fine and Santiago López Navia (Madrid; Frankfurt: Iberoamericana;
Vervuert, 2008), pp. 407–34.
Brownlee, Marina. ‘Zoraida’s White Hand and Cervantes’ Rewriting of History’.
Bulletin of Hispanic Studies 82, no. 5 (2005): pp. 569–85.
Burningham, Bruce R. ‘Eco-Performativity in Persiles y Sigismunda’.
eHumanista/Cervantes 5 (2016): pp. 155–72.
Burningham, Bruce R. ‘Os Manchíadas’. In USA Cervantes: 39 Cervantistas en
Estados Unidos, edited by Georgina Dopico Black, Francisco Layna Ranz, and
Enrique García Santo-Tomás (Madrid: Polifemo, 2009), pp. 251–72.
Burningham, Bruce R. Tilting Cervantes: Baroque Reflections on Postmodern
Culture (Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press, 2008).
Burton, Grace M. ‘From Skepticism to Science: La cueva de Salamanca and the
Construction of Modern Thought’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of
America 34, no. 1 (2014): pp. 141–69.
Byrne, Susan. Law and History in Cervantes’s Don Quixote (Toronto: University of
Toronto Press, 2012).
Camacho Morfín, Lilián. ‘El lenguaje de las emociones en el Quijote de 1605’. In
’Injerto peregrino de bienes y grandezas admirables’: Estudios de literatura y
cultura española e hispanoamericana (siglos XVI al XVIII), edited by Lillian Von
der Walde, María José Rodilla, Alma Mejía, Gustavo Illades, Alejandro
Higashi, and Serafín González (Mexico City: Universidad Autónoma
Metropolitana, Unidad Iztapalapa, 2007), pp. 363–74.
Carreño-Rodríguez, Antonio. ‘Costello + Panza = Costanza: Paradigmatic Pairs
in Don Quixote and American Popular Culture’. Journal of Popular Film and
Television 37, no. 2 (2009): pp. 80–8.
Cartagena-Calderón, José R. ‘Cervantes y las ficciones de la masculinidad’. In
Tradition and Innovation in Early Modern Spanish Studies: Essays in Memory of
Carroll B. Johnson, edited by Sherry Velasco (Newark: Juan de la Cuesta,
2008), pp. 51–88.
Cascardi, Anthony J. Cervantes, Literature, and the Discourse of Politics (Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 2011).
Cascardi, Anthony J. ‘¿Qué es filosofar? A Dog’s-Eye View’. Cervantes: Bulletin of
the Cervantes Society of America 34, no. 1 (2014): pp. 77–95.
Cascardi, Anthony J. The Cambridge Companion to Cervantes (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2002).
Castillo, David R. Baroque Horrors: Roots of the Fantastic in the Age of Curiosities
(Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2011).
Castillo, David R. ‘Don Quixote and Political Satire: Cervantine Lessons from
Sacha Baron Cohen and Stephen Colbert’. In Approaches to Teaching Don
Quixote, edited by James A. Parr and Lisa Vollendorf (New York: Modern
Language Association, 2015), pp. 171–7.
Castillo, David R. ‘The Literary Classics in Today’s Classroom: Don Quixote and
Road Movies’. Hispanic Issues on Line 8 (2011): pp. 26–41.
Castillo, David and William Egginton. Medialogies: Reading Reality in the Age of
Inflationary Media (London: Bloomsbury, 2017).
Castillo, Moisés R. ‘Espacios de ambigüedad en el teatro cervantino: La conquista
de Jerusalén y los dramas de cautiverio’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes
Society of America 32, no. 2 (2012): pp. 123–42.
Castillo, Moisés R. ‘¿Ortodoxia cervantina? Un análisis de La gran sultana, El
trato de Argel y Los baños de Argel’. Bulletin of the Comediantes 56, no. 2
(2004): pp. 219–40.
Chartier, Roger and Janet Lloyd. Cardenio Between Cervantes and Shakespeare:
The Story of a Lost Play (Cambridge: Polity, 2013).
Chen Sham, Jorge. ‘De estudiantes ejemplares y su aprendizaje modélico en La
señora Cornelia’. In Cervantes novelador: Las novelas ejemplares cuatrocientos
años después, edited by Jorge R. G. Sagastume (Málaga: Fundación Málaga,
2014), pp. 153–69.
Childers, William. Transnational Cervantes (Toronto: University of Toronto Press,
2006).
Ciallella, Louise. Quixotic Modernists: Reading Gender in Tristana, Trigo, and
Martínez Sierra (Lewisburg, PA: Bucknell University Press, 2007).
Clamurro, William H. Cervantes’s Novela ejemplares: Reading Their Lessons from
His Time to Ours (Lanham: Lexington, 2015).
Close, Anthony. A Companion to Don Quixote (Woodbridge: Tamesis, 2010).
Cohen, Jaclyn M. ‘Writing the Emotions: A Study of Shame and Guilt in Female-
Authored Texts of Spain’s Golden Age’. Dissertation (Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University, 2012).
Connor-Swietlicki, Catherine. ‘Beyond Cognition: Don Quijote and Other
Embodied Minds’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 32, no.
1 (2012): pp. 231–61.
Connor (Swietlicki), Catherine. ‘Cervantes’s Legacy of Creative Cognition: “All
Things Are Possible” (“Todo Puede Ser”)’. Central Institute of English and
Foreign Languages Bulletin 15–16, nos. 2–1 (2005): pp. 67–84.
Connor (Swietlicki), Catherine. ‘Seeing Like Sancho: Embodiment, Cognition
and Cervantine Creativity’. In Cervantes y su mundo III, edited by A. Robert
Lauer and Kurt Reichenberger (Kassel: Reichenberger, 2005), pp. 61–79.
Correa-Díaz, Luis and Fernando Moreno. Cervantes y América/Cervantes en las
Américas: Mapa de campo y ensayo de bibliografía razonada (Kassel:
Reichenberger, 2004).
Corteguera, Luis R. ‘Sancho Panza Wants an Island: Cervantes and the Politics of
Peasant Rulers’. Romance Quarterly 52, no. 4 (2005): pp. 261–70.
Cruz, Anne J. ‘Dorotea’s Revenge: Sex and Speech Acts in Don Quijote, Part 1’.
Bulletin of Hispanic Studies 82, no. 5 (2005): pp. 615–32.
Cruz, Anne J. ‘Psyche and Gender in Cervantes’. In The Cambridge Companion to
Cervantes, edited by Anthony J. Cascardi (Cambridge University Press, 2002),
pp. 186–205.
Cruz, Anne J. ‘Redressing Dorotea’. In Cervantes for the 21st Century/Cervantes
para el siglo XXI: Studies in Honor of Edward Dudley, edited by Francisco La
Rubia Prado (Newark: Juan de la Cuesta, 2000), pp. 11–32.
Cruz, Anne J. and Carroll B. Johnson, eds. Cervantes and His Postmodern
Constituencies (New York: Garland, 1999).
D’Haen, Theo and Reindert Dhondt. International Don Quixote (Amsterdam:
Rodopi, 2009).
Da Silva, Zenia Sacks. Don Quixote: The First 400 Years (Lima, Peru; Hempstead,
NY: Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos; Hofstra University, 2009).
De Armas, Frederick A. Don Quixote Among the Saracens: A Clash of Civilizations
and Literary Genres (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2011).
De Armas, Frederick A. Ekphrasis in the Age of Cervantes (Lewisburg: Bucknell
University Press, 2005).
De Armas, Frederick A. Quixotic Frescoes: Cervantes and Italian Renaissance Art
(Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2006).
Díez Fernández, J. Ignacio. ‘Juegos de máscara y marketing: Para una críticia de
la novela en clave de los Siglos de Oro’. In Spain’s Multicultural Legacies:
Studies in Honor of Samuel G. Armistead, edited by Adrienne Martín and
Cristina Martínez-Carazo (Newark: Juan de la Cuesta, 2008), pp. 77–94.
Díez Fernández, J. Ignacio. ‘“Sin discrepar de la verdad un punto”: La gran
sultana: ¿Un canto a la tolerancia?’. Lectura y Signo: Revista de literatura 1
(2006): pp. 301–22.
Domínguez, Julia. ‘Luces, cámara…inacción en Lost in La Mancha: La realidad
de una ficción que nunca existió’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of
America 27, no. 2 (2007): pp. 23–42.
Donnell, Sidney. ‘Quixotic Storytelling, Lost in La Mancha, and the Unmaking of
The Man Who Killed Don Quixote’. Romance Quarterly 53, no. 2 (2006): pp. 92–
112.
Dopico Black, Georgina, Francisco Layna Ranz, and Enrique García Santo-
Tomás, eds. USA Cervantes: 39 Cervantistas en Estados Unidos (Madrid:
Polifemo, 2009).
Dunn, Peter N. ‘The Play of Desire: “El amante liberal” and “El casamiento
engañoso” y “El coloquio de los perros”’. In A Companion to Cervantes’s
Novelas Ejemplares, edited by Stephen Boyd (London: Tamesis, 2005), pp.
85–103.
Egginton, William. The Man Who Invented Fiction: How Cervantes Ushered in the
Modern World (New York: Bloomsbury, 2016).
Eisenberg, Daniel (ed). ‘The Tragedy of John Bowle’ [Special cluster]. Cervantes:
Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 23, no. 2 (2003): 1–274.
Ertler, Klaus-Dieter and Alejandro Rodríguez Díaz. El Quijote hoy: La riqueza de
su recepción (Madrid; Frankfurt: Iberoamericana; Vervuert, 2007).
Fastrup, Anne. ‘Cross-Cultural Movement in the Name of Honour: Renegades,
Honour and State in Miguel de Cervantes’s Barbary Plays’. Bulletin of Spanish
Studies 89, no. 3 (2012): pp. 347–67.
Fernández, Esther. ‘En busca de un teatro comprometido: La entretenida de
Miguel de Cervantes bajo el nuevo prisma de la CNTC’. Comedia Performance
4, no. 1 (2007): pp. 179–98.
Fernández, Esther. ‘Viaje del Parnaso: Una odisea de títeres en escena’. Cervantes:
Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 31, no. 2 (2011): pp. 85–103.
Fernández, Esther and M. Reina Ruiz. ‘Una mesa de trucos en escena:
Metamorfosis dramática en “La española inglesa”’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the
Cervantes Society of America 35, no. 2 (2015): pp. 193–213.
Fernández, Jaime. Bibliografía del Quijote por unidades narrativas y materiales de
la novela, 2 vols. (Madrid: Centro de Esudios Cervantinos, 2008).
Fine, Ruth. ‘En torno a la representación de la mujer judía en la obra de
Cervantes en el contexto de la literatura del Siglo de Oro español’. Cuadernos
AISPI 5, no. 5 (2015): pp. 33–46.
Fine, Ruth. Una lectura semiótico-narratológica del Quijote en el contexto del siglo
de oro español (Madrid; Frankfurt: Iberoamericana; Vervuert, 2006).
Fine, Ruth and Santiago Alfonso López Navia (eds). Cervantes y las religiones:
Actas del Coloquio International de la Asociación de Cervantistas (Universidada
Hebrea de Jerusalén, Israel, 19–21 de diciembre de 2005) (Pamplona: University
of Navarra, 2008).
Friedman, Edward H. ‘Bearing the Weight of Writing: On Kundera and
Cervantes’. In Aquí se imprimen libros: Cervantine Studies in Honor of Tom
Lathrop, edited by Mark Groundland (University: Romance Monographs,
2008), pp. 48–61.
Fuchs, Barbara. ‘Empire Unmanned: Gender Trouble and Genoese Gold in
Cervantes’s “The Two Damsels”’. PMLA 116, no. 2 (2001): pp. 285–99.
Fuchs, Barbara. Mimesis and Empire: The New World, Islam, and European
Identities (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001).
Fuchs, Barbara. Passing for Spain: Cervantes and the Fictions of Identity (Urbana:
University of Illinois Press, 2003).
Fuchs, Barbara and Aaron J. Ilika (trans. and ed.). ‘The Bagnios of Algiers’ and
‘The Great Sultana’: Two Plays of Captivity, by Miguel de Cervantes
(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2010).
Gabriele, John P., ed. 1605–2005: Don Quixote Across the Centuries (Madrid;
Frankfurt: Iberoamericana; Vervuert, 2005).
Gabriele, John P. ‘Narrative Prisms and Prisons: Mirror Effects and Mise-en-
Abyme in Don Quijote’. Symposium 59, no. 1 (2005): pp. 31–42.
Ganguly, Shyama Prasad (ed.). Quixotic Encounters: Indian Response to the Knight
from Spain (New Delhi: Shipra, 2006).
Garcés, María Antonia. Cervantes in Algiers: A Captive’s Tale (Nashville:
Vanderbilt University Press, 2002).
García, Martha. La función de los personajes femeninos en Don Quijote de la
Mancha y su relevancia en la narrativa (Vigo: Academia del Hispanismo,
2008).
García Reidy, Alejandro. ‘Profesionales de la escena: Lope de Vega y los actores
del teatro comercial barroco’. In ’Aún no dejó la pluma’: Estudios sobre el teatro
de Lope de Vega, edited by Xavier Tubau (Barcelona: Universitat Autónoma de
Barcelona, 2009), pp. 243–84.
Garrido Domínguez, Antonio. Aspectos de la novela en Cervantes (Madrid:
Universidad Complutense de Madrid, 2006).
Garst-Santos, Christine. ‘Dorotea’s Displacement: Performing the Possible in
Early Modern Spain’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 31,
no. 2 (2011): pp. 51–84.
Gasta, Chad M. ‘Cervantes’s Theory of Relativity in Don Quixote’. Cervantes:
Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 31, no. 1 (2011): pp. 51–82.
Gil-Oslé, Juan Pablo. Amistades imperfectas: Del Humanismo a la Ilustración con
Cervantes (Madrid: Iberoamericana, 2013).
Gil-Oslé, Juan Pablo. ‘Hyperreality and Cervantine Cultural Encounters in
Beijing 2016’. Cervantes in China on His 400th Anniversary. University of
Chicago Center in Beijing. Beijing, China. 21 June 2016.
González, José Manuel. ‘Emotion in Cervantes and Shakespeare’. Neophilologus
99, no. 4 (2015): pp. 523–38.
González Echevarría, Roberto. Love and the Law in Cervantes (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 2005).
Graf, E. C. Cervantes and Modernity: Four Essays on Don Quixote (Lewisberg:
Bucknell University Press, 2010).
Gretter, Sarah. ‘Jealousy in Cervantes: Emotion, Cognition, and the Novel’.
Dissertation (West Lafayette: Purdue University, 2013).
Grossman, Edith (trans). Don Quixote de la Mancha, by Miguel de Cervantes
(New York: HarperCollins, 2003).
Hall, Crystal. Galileo’s Reading (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013).
Hamilton, Charles (ed.). Cardenio or The Second Maiden’s Tragedy, by William
Shakespeare and John Fletcher (Lakewood: Glenbridge, 1994).
Henry, Melanie. The Signifying Self: Cervantine Drama as Counter-Perspective
Aesthetic (London: Modern Humanities Research Association, 2013).
Hernández-Pecoraro, Rosilie. ‘Don Quijote’s Dorotea: Portrait of a Female
Subject’. Hispanófila 135 (2002): pp. 19–39.
Hernández Pecoraro, Rosilie. ‘“La fuerza del amor” or the Power of Self-Love:
Zayas’s Response to Cervantes’s “La fuerza de la sangre”’. Hispanic Review 70,
no. 1 (2002): pp. 39–57.
Hessel, Stephen. ‘The Dog’s Growl: Narration in Las novelas ejemplares’.
Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 28, no. 2 (2008): pp. 7–
17.
Hutchinson, Steven. ‘Affective Dimensions in Don Quijote’. Cervantes: Bulletin of
the Cervantes Society of America 24, no. 2 (2004): pp. 71–91.
Hutchinson, Steven. Economía ética en Cervantes (Alcalá de Henares: Centro de
Estudios Cervantinos, 2001).
Hutchinson, Steven. ‘“Los primeros movimientos no son en mano del hombre”:
Retórica de la emoción en Don Quijote’. In Cervantes en Italia: Actas del X
Coloquio Internacional de la Asociación de Cervantistas, edited by Alicia Villar
Lecumberri (Palma: Asociación de Cervantistas, 2001), pp. 199–206.
Ife, B. W. ‘Air Travel in Cervantes’. Bulletin of Spanish Studies 81, nos. 4–5
(2004): pp. 475–86.
Iffland, James. ‘Don Quijote and the Dissident Intellectual: Some Thoughts on
Subcomandante Marcos’s Don Durito de la Lacandona’. In Studies in Honor of
James O. Crosby, edited by Lía Schwartz (Newark, DE: Juan de la Cuesta,
2004), pp. 161–79.
Iffland, James. ‘Mangled in La Mancha: Don Quijote Meets the Spanglish of Ilan
Stavans’. In Don Quijote: Across Four Centuries: 1605–2005, edited by Carroll
Johnson (Newark: Juan de la Cuesta, 2006), pp. 107–35.
Iffland, James. ‘Seeing Is Believing: The Rhetoric of Graphic Illustration in the
History of Don Quijote’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America
27, no. 1 (2007): pp. 95–160.
Irigoyen-Garcia, Javier. ‘Cervantes y la trata de blancas en “La ilustre fregona”’.
In Líneas actuales de investigación literaria: Estudios de literatura hispánica,
edited by Verónica Arenas Lozano, et al. (Valencia: Asociación de Jóvenes
Investigadores de la Literatura Hispánica, Universitat de València, 2004), pp.
241–50.
Irigoyen-Garcia, Javier. ‘El problema morisco en Los baños de Argel, de Miguel
de Cervantes: De renegados a mártires cristianos’. Revista canadiense de
estudios hispánicos 32, no. 3 (2008): pp. 421–8.
Irigoyen-Garcia, Javier. ‘La expulsión de los moriscos en El ingenioso hidalgo don
Quijote de la Mancha (1614) de Alonso Fernández de Avellaneda’. MLN 131,
no. 2 (2016): pp. 336–55.
Irigoyen-Garcia, Javier. ‘“La música ha sido hereje”: Pastoral Performance,
Moorishness, and Cultural Hybridity in Los baños de Argel’. Bulletin of the
Comediantes 62, no. 2 (2010): pp. 45–62.
Irigoyen-Garcia, Javier. ‘“Poco os falta para moros, pues tanto lo parecéis”:
Impersonating the Moor in the Spanish Mediterranean’. Journal of Spanish
Cultural Studies 12, no. 3 (2011): pp. 355–69.
Jaén, Isabel. ‘Cervantes and the Cognitive Theories of His Time: Mind and
Development in Don Quixote’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of
America 32, no. 1 (2012): pp. 71–98.
Jaén, Isabel. ‘Teaching Cervantes’s Don Quixote from a Cognitive Historicist
Perspective’. Interdisciplinary Literary Studies 16, no. 1 (2014): pp. 110–26.
Jaén Portillo, Isabel. ‘Cervantes on Human Development: Don Quixote and
Renaissance 
Cognitive 
Psychology’. 
In 
Don 
Quixote: 
Interdisciplinary
Connections, edited by Matthew D. Warshawsky and James A. Parr (Newark:
Juan de la Cuesta, 2013), pp. 35–57.
Jehenson, Myriam Yvonne and Peter N. Donne. The Utopian Nexus in Don
Quixote (Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press, 2006).
Johnson, Carroll B. Cervantes and the Material World (Urbana: University of
Illinois Press, 2000).
Johnson, Carroll B. Don Quijote: Across Four Centuries: 1605–2005 (Newark:
Juan de la Cuesta, 2006).
Johnson, Paul Michael. ‘A Soldier’s Shame: The Specter of Captivity in “La
historia del cautivo”’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 31,
no. 2 (2011): pp. 153–84.
Johnson, Paul Michael. ‘Expulsión forzada e integración forzosa: Reflexiones
quijotescas sobre la tolerancia multicultural histórica y actual’. Gaceta
Hispánica de Madrid 3 (2006): pp. 1–16.
Kahn, Aaron M. ‘Even Further Towards a Theory of Attribution: Advancing the
Cervantine Attribution of La conquista de Jerusalén por Godofre de Bullón’.
Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 33, no. 1 (2013): pp.
133–65.
Kahn, Aaron M. ‘Representation and Interpretation of Historical Characters in
Cervantes’s La Numancia: Jugurtha and Viriatus’. Bulletin of Hispanic Studies
84, no. 5 (2007): pp. 573–87.
Kahn, Aaron M. ‘Towards a Theory of Attribution: Is La conquista de Jerusalén by
Miguel de Cervantes?’ Journal of European Studies 40, no. 2 (2010): pp. 99–
128.
Kristiansen, Michael Phillip. ‘Gender and Interpretation: An Empirical Study of
Reader Response to Golden Age Literature’. Dissertation (Tucson: University
of Arizona, 2001).
La Rubia Prado, Francisco (ed.). Cervantes for the 21st Century/Cervantes para el
siglo XXI: Studies in Honor of Edward Dudley (Newark: Juan de la Cuesta,
2000).
Laguna, Ana María G. Cervantes and the Pictorial Imagination: A Study on the
Power of Images and Images of Power in Works by Cervantes (Lewisburg:
Bucknell University Press, 2009).
Lathrop, Tom (trans.). Don Quixote de la Mancha, by Miguel de Cervantes (New
York: Signet, 2011).
Latorre, Jorge, Antonio Martínez, and Oleksandr Pronkévich (eds). El telón
rasgado: El Quijote como puente cultural con el mundo soviético y postsoviético
(Pamplona: EUNSA, 2015).
Lauer, A. Robert. ‘Altisidora y “la ley de la madre”: Una lectura lacaniana del
Quijote’. In Visiones y revisiones cervantinas, edited by Christoph Strosetzki and
José Montero-Reguera (Alcalá de Henares: Centro de Estudios Cervantinos,
2011), pp. 433–41.
Lauer, A. Robert. ‘Las estrategias retórico-narrativas de La Dorotea de Cervantes:
Don Quijote I.24, 28–30, 36–37, 46’. In Hispanic Studies in Honor of Robert L.
Fiore, edited by Chad M. Gasta and Julia Domínguez (Newark: Juan de la
Cuesta, 2009), pp. 295–309.
Lauer, A. Robert. ‘The Protean Dorotea and the Spanish Baroque Novel’. Central
Institute of English and Foreign Languages Bulletin 15–16, no. 2–1, (2005): pp.
85–102.
Leahy, Chad. ‘“Dineros en cruzados”: The Morisco Expulsion, Numismatic
Propaganda, and the Materiality of Ricote’s Coins’. Hispanic Review 84, no. 3
(2016): pp. 273–98.
Lee, Christina H. ‘The Forgotten Chinese Experience in the Early Modern
Hispanic World and Why It Matters’. Cervantes in China on His 400th
Anniversary. University of Chicago Center in Beijing. Beijing, China. 21 June
2016.
Lewis, Elizabeth Franklin. ‘Mapping Don Quixote’s Route: Spanish Cartography,
English Travelers and National Pride’. Studies in Eighteenth-Century Culture 46
(2017): pp. 35–48.
Lewis-Smith, Paul. ‘Literature and Sin: Moral-Theological Wisdom and Literary
Ethics in Cervantes’s El licenciado Vidriera’. Modern Language Review 105, no. 2
(April 2010): pp. 439–54.
Lezra, Jacques. ‘Translated Turks on the Early Modern Stage’. In Transnational
Exchange in Early Modern Theater, edited by Robert Henke and Eric Nicholson
(Aldershot: Ashgate, 2008), pp. 159–78.
López Alemany, Ignacio. ‘Courting Don Quixote: An Aulic Frame of Reading’.
Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 33, no. 2 (2013): pp. 49–
70.
López Alemany, Ignacio. ‘Ut Pictura Non Poesis: Los trabajos de Persiles y
Sigismunda and the Construction of Memory’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the
Cervantes Society of America 28, no. 1 (2008): pp. 103–18.
López-Baralt, Luce. ‘Apostillas árabes a un chiste cervantino: Cide Hamete
Berenjena’. In Studies in Spanish Literature in Honor of Daniel Eisenberg, edited
by Tom Lathrop (Newark: Juan de la Cuesta, 2009), pp. 153–60.
López-Baralt, Luce. ‘El sabio encantador Cide Hamete Benengeli: ¿Fue un
musulmán de Al-Andalus o un morisco del siglo XVII?’. In Cervantes y las
religiones, edited by Ruth Fine and Santiago López Navia (Madrid; Frankfurt:
Iberoamericana; Vervuert, 2008), pp. 339–60.
López-Baralt, Luce. ‘Un morisco Ricote de carne y hueso nos habla de la
angustia secreta de su exilio en Berbería’. Studi Ispanici 32 (2007): pp. 73–88.
López-Baralt, Luce and Marikay McCabe. ‘The Supreme Pen (Al-Qalam Al-A’lā)
of Cide Hamete Benengeli in Don Quixote’. Journal of Medieval and Early
Modern Studies 30, no. 3 (2000): pp. 505–18.
Lorca, Daniel. ‘The Function of Skepticism in Part I of Don Quixote’. Cervantes:
Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 30, no. 2 (2010): pp. 115–48.
Lozano-Renieblas, Isabel. ‘Género e identidad de el Quijote’. In Cervantes y su
mundo, II, edited by Kurt Reichenberger and Darío Fernández-Morera (Kassel:
Reichenberger, 2005), pp. 295–308.
Lozano-Renieblas, Isabel. ‘Huellas y nostalgias: La presencia elíptica de
Andalucía en el segundo Quijote y en el Persiles’. Tintas: Quaderni di Letterature
Iberiche e Iberoamericane 1 (2011): pp. 25–41.
Lucía Megías, José Manuel, dir. Banco de imágenes del Quijote (1605–1915).
http://www.qbi2005.com.
Lucía Megías, José Manuel. ‘Don Quijote de la Mancha, caballero andante: El
acto de investidura a partir de sus imágenes’. Lingüística y literatura 28, no. 51
(2007): pp. 149–89.
Lucía Megías, José Manuel. La juventud de Cervantes: Una vida en construcción
(Madrid: EDAF, 2016).
Lucía Megías, José Manuel. La madurez de Cervantes: Una vida en la corte
(Madrid: EDAF, 2016).
Lucía Megías, José Manuel. La plenitud de Cervantes: Una vida en papel (Madrid:
EDAF, 2019).
Madroñal, Abraham. ‘Entremeses intercalados en El Quijote’. In El Quijote y el
pensamiento teórico-literario, edited by Miguel Ángel Garrido Gallardo and Luis
Alburquerque (Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas,
2008), pp. 265–77.
Maestro, Jesús G. Cervantes en escena: Nuevas interpretaciones del teatro cervantino
(Vigo: Academia del Hispanismo, 2017).
Maestro, Jesús G. ‘Cervantes y el teatro del Quijote’. Hispania 88, no. 1 (2005):
pp. 41–52.
Maestro, Jesús G. El mito de la interpretación literaria: Rojas, Cervantes y Calderón:
La ética de la literatura y sus dogmas contemporáneos (Madrid; Frankfurt:
Iberoamericana; Vervuert, 2004).
Maestro, Jesús G. ‘El triunfo de la heterodoxia: El teatro de Cervantes y la
literatura europea’. Theatralia 5 (2003): pp. 19–48.
Maestro, Jesús G. La escena imaginaria: Poética del teatro de Miguel de Cervantes
(Madrid; Frankfurt: Iberoamericana; Vervuert, 2000).
Maestro, Jesus G. ‘Miguel de Cervantes y el teatro’. Theatralia 5 (2003): pp.
467–502.
Majfud, Jorge. ‘Diarios de Motocicleta y los rebeldes de nuestro tiempo’. A Parte
Rei: Revista de filosofía 44 (2006): pp. 1–3.
Malfatti, Sarah. ‘El deseo de ser sí mismo: Don Quijote y la mímesis girardiana’.
Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 33, no. 2 (2013): pp.
193–215.
Mancing, Howard. ‘Applying Theory of Mind to Don Quixote’. In Approaches to
Teaching Don Quixote, edited by James A. Parr and Lisa Vollendorf (New
York: Modern Language Association, 2015), pp. 147–52.
Mancing, Howard. ‘Embodied Cognitive Science and the Study of Literature’.
Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 32, no. 1 (2012): pp. 25–
69.
Mancing, Howard. The Cervantes Encyclopedia, I, A–K (Westport: Greenwood,
2004).
Mancing, Howard. The Cervantes Encyclopedia, II, L–Z (Westport: Greenwood,
2004).
Mancing, Howard. ‘The Mind of a Pícaro: Lázaro de Tormes’. In Cognition,
Literature, and History, edited by Mark J. Bruhn and Donald R. Wehrs (New
York: Routledge, 2014), pp. 174–89.
Mann, Charles. 1493: Uncovering the New World Columbus Created (New York:
Vintage, 2012).
Manning, Patricia W. ‘Present Dogs, Absent Witches: Illustration and
Interpretation of El coloquio de los perros’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes
Society of America 27, no. 2 (2007): pp. 125–54.
Márquez Villanueva, Francisco. ‘Eufemismos del Viaje del Parnaso’. Bulletin of
Hispanic Studies 82, no. 5 (2005): pp. 683–700.
Martín, Adrienne L. ‘Berganza, comediante: El animal escénico en el Siglo de
Oro’. Insula: Revista de letras y ciencias humanas 799–800 (2013): pp. 28–30.
Martín, Adrienne L. An Erotic Philology of Golden Age Spain (Nashville:
Vanderbilt University Press, 2008).
Martín, Adrienne L. ‘Onstage/Backstage: Animals in the Golden Age Comedia’.
In A Companion to Early Modern Hispanic Theater, edited by Hilaire Kallendorf
(Leiden: Brill, 2014), pp. 127–44.
Martín Morán, José Manuel. Cervantes y el Quijote hacia la novela moderna
(Alcalá de Henares: Biblioteca de Estudios Cervantinos, 2009).
Martínez Góngora, Mar. El hombre atemperado: Autocontrol, disciplina y
masculinidad en textos españoles de la temprana modernidad (New York: Peter
Lang, 2005).
Martínez-Góngora, Mar. ‘Un unicornio en la corte de una reina virgen:
“Ginecocracia” y ansiedades masculinas en “La española inglesa”’. Cervantes:
Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 20, no. 1 (2000): pp. 27–46.
Martínez Torrón, Diego and Bernd Dietz. Cervantes y el ámbito anglosajón
(Madrid: SIAL, 2005).
Mata Indurain, Carlos. ‘Elementos religiosos en la poesía de Cervantes’. In
Cervantes y las religiones, edited by Ruth Fine and Santiago López Navia
(Madrid; Frankfurt: Iberoamericana; Vervuert, 2008), pp. 175–98.
Maughan, Rona Lee. ‘The Object of the Gaze and Masculinity: The Portrayal of
Don Quixote in Film. Dissertation (Salt Lake City: University of Utah, 2005).
McGaha, Michael. ‘La Gran Sultana: La “delicia turca” de Cervantes’. In Studies
in Spanish Literature in Honor of Daniel Eisenberg, edited by Tom Lathrop
(Newark: Juan de la Cuesta, 2009), pp. 213–30.
McGaha, Michael. ‘Reading Don Quixote in Istanbul’. Central Institute of English
and Foreign Languages Bulletin 15–16, nos. 2–1 (2005): pp. 155–18.
McGraw, Mark David. ‘The Universal Quixote: Appropriations of a Literary
Icon’. Dissertation (College Station: Texas A&M University, 2013).
McMorran, Will. ‘From Quixote to Caractacus: Influence, Intertextuality, and
Chitty Chitty Bang Bang’. Journal of Popular Culture 39, no. 5 (2006): pp. 756–
79.
McMorris, Elizabeth and Isabel Bohrer. ‘Cine, nacionalismo y literatura: La
representación de Don Quijote’. Gaceta Hispánica de Madrid 7 (2008): pp. 1–
34.
Miñana, Rogelio. Monstruos que hablan: El discurso de la monstruosidad en
Cervantes (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2007).
Miñana, Rogelio. ‘The Don Quixote of the Streets: Social Justice Theater in São
Paulo, Brazil’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 31, no. 1
(2011): pp. 159–70.
Morillo, María Dolores. ‘El retablo de las maravillas: Ver para hacer creer’.
Cuadernos Cervantes de la lengua española 9, no. 45 (2003): pp. 26–31.
Nadeau, Carolyn A. Food Matters: Alonso Quijano’s Diet and the Discourse of Food
in Early Modern Spain (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2016).
Nadeau, Carolyn A. Women of the Prologue: Imitation, Myth, and Magic in Don
Quixote I (Cranbury: Associated University Press, 2002).
Navas Ocaña, Isabel. ‘Cervantes y la crítica feminista’. In El Quijote y el
pensamiento teórico-literario, edited by Miguel Ángel Garrido Gallardo and Luis
Alburquerque 
García 
(Madrid: 
Consejo 
Superior 
de 
Investigaciones
Científicas, 2008), pp. 573–89.
Navas Ocaña, Isabel. ‘Lecturas feministas de Cervantes’. Romanische Forschungen
124, no. 2 (2012): pp. 222–38.
Novillo-Corvalán, Patricia. ‘Androgynous Desire: Flaubert, Joyce, Puig, and the
Tradition of the Female Quixote’. Modern Language Review 107, no. 1 (2012):
pp. 1–19.
Ohanna, Natalio. ‘Heterodoxos en cautiverio: De Cipriano de Valera a los
protestantes del norte de África’. Hispanic Review 80, no. 1 (2012): pp. 21–40.
Ohanna, Natalio. ‘Lamentos de doble filo: El trato de Argel y la dimensión
geopolítica de la lucha por la unidad religiosa’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the
Cervantes Society of America 30, no. 1 (2010): pp. 141–61.
Pant, Preeti. ‘The Natyashashtra and the Quixote on the Understanding of
Fiction’. In Quixotic Encounters: Indian Response to the Knight from Spain, edited
by Shyama Prasad Ganguly (New Delhi: Shipra, 2006), pp. 29–45.
Pant, Preeti. ‘Un encuentro polémico de la novela moderna y el género
caballeresco en Chandrakanta (una novela india del siglo XIX)’. In 400 años
de Don Quijote: Pasado y perspectivas de futuro, Actas del XL Congreso
Internacional de la Asociación Europea de Profesores de Español, edited by
Sara M. Saz (Valladolid: AEPE, 2006), pp. 71–9.
Parker Aronson, Stacey L. ‘“Quizá Volverán”: Four Incidents of Rape (Or
Threatened Rape) in Don Quijote de la Mancha’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the
Cervantes Society of America 34, no. 1 (2014): pp. 121–40.
Parr, James A. ‘Celebrating 400 years of Don Quixote’. Hispania 88, no. 1 (2005):
pp. 1–113.
Parr, James A. and Salvador J. Fajardo, eds. El Ingenioso Hidaldo Don Quijote de
la Mancha, by Miguel de Cervantes, 2 vols. (Ashville: Pegasus; University of
North Carolina, Ashville, 2009).
Parr, James A. and Lisa Vollendorf, eds. Approaches to Teaching Cervantes’s Don
Quixote, 2nd ed. (New York: Modern Language Association, 2015).
Pérez, Ashley Hope. ‘Into the Dark Triangle of Desire: Rivalry, Resistance, and
Repression in “El Curioso Impertinente”’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes
Society of America 31, no. 1 (2011): pp. 83–107.
Perez, Karen Patricia. ‘On Both Sides of the Atlantic: Re-Visioning Don Juan and
Don Quixote in Modern Literature and Film’. Dissertation (Riverside:
University of California, Riverside, 2013).
Pérez de León, Vicente. ‘Síndromes cervantinos en “El asesinato de Jesse James
por el cobarde Robert Ford” de Andrew Dominik’. Voz y letra 19, no. 2
(2008): pp. 51–68.
Pérez Magallón, Jesús. Cervantes, monumento de la nación: Problemas de identidad
y cultura (Madrid: Cátedra, 2015).
Pinet, Simone. Archipelagoes: Insular Fictions from Chivalric Romance to the Novel.
Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 2011.
Pinet, Simone. ‘On the Subject of Fiction: Islands and the Emergence of the
Novel’. Diacritics 33, nos. 3–4 (2003): pp. 173–87.
Pinet, Simone. ‘Theatrum Mundi: Cervantes, el teatro y la cartografía’.
Theatralia 5 (2003): pp. 133–42.
Powell, Matthew. ‘On Ah Gan’s Don Quixote (魔俠傳之唐吉德, 2010): Successes
and Endings of a Movie’. Cervantes in China on His 400th Anniversary.
University of Chicago Center in Beijing. Beijing, China. 22 June 2016.
Presberg, Charles D. Adventures in Paradox: Don Quixote and the Western
Tradition (University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 2001).
Puig, Idoya, ed. Tradition and Modernity: Cervantes’s Presence in Spanish
Contemporary Literature (Oxford: Peter Lang, 2009).
Quinn, Mary. ‘“Un cierto claro escuro”: Night and the Performance of Class in
the Palace Episodes of Don Quijote, II’. Ehumanista 22 (2012): pp. 330–41.
Quint, David. Cervantes’s Novel of Modern Times: A New Reading of Don Quijote
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003).
Ramírez, Álvaro. ‘Don Quijote and the Age of Simulacra’. Hispania 88, no. 1
(2005): pp. 82–90.
Randall, Dale B. J. and Jackson C. Boswell. Cervantes in Seventeenth-Century
England: The Tapestry Turned (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009).
Redondo, Augustin. Releyendo el Quijote, cuatrocientos años después (Madrid:
Centro de Estudios Cervantinos, 2005).
Reed, Cory A. ‘Scientific and Technological Imagery in Don Quixote’. In
Approaches to Teaching Don Quixote, edited by James A. Parr and Lisa
Vollendorf (New York: Modern Language Association, 2015), pp. 66–70.
Reguera, José Montero. ‘Un cervantista mexicano: Francisco A. de Icaza’. Foro
Hispánico 40 (2010): pp. 113–29.
Rico, Francisco, ed. Don Quijote de la Mancha, by Miguel de Cervantes (Madrid:
Real Academa Española, 2015).
Rico, Francisco. ‘El título del Quijote’. Bulletin of Spanish Studies 81, no. 4–5
(2004): pp. 541–51.
Rico, Francisco. ‘Poética de la antífrasis (Sobre la dedicatoria del primer
Quijote)’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 25, no. 1
(2005): pp. 69–77.
Rico, Francisco. Tiempos del Quijote (Barcelona: Acantilado, 2012).
Rouhi, Leyla. ‘A Handsome Boy among Those Barbarous Turks: Cervantes’s
Muslims and the Art and Science of Desire’. In Islamicate Sexualities:
Translations across Temporal Geographies of Desire, edited by Kathryn Babayan
and Afsaneh Najmabadi (Cambridge, MA: Center for Middle Eastern Studies,
Harvard University, 2008), pp. 41–71.
Rudrum, David. ‘Narrativity and Performativity: From Cervantes to Star Trek’.
In Theorizing Narrativity, edited by John Pier and José Angel García Landa
(Berlin: de Gruyter, 2008), pp. 253–76.
Ruhe, Cornelia. ‘Prekäre Exemplarität: Geschlechterkonfigurationen in Las dos
doncellas von Miguel de Cervantes’. Romanische Forschungen 119, no. 3
(2007): pp. 317–45.
Ruiz, Carrie L. ‘Ver o no ver: “El celoso extremeño” “algún misterio tiene
escondido”’. In Novelas ejemplares: Las grietas de la ejemplaridad, edited by
Julio Baena (Newark: Juan de la Cuesta, 2008), pp. 187–99.
Ruiz, Eduardo. ‘Counter-Discursive and Erotic Agency: The Case of the Black
Slaves in Miguel de Cervantes’s “El celoso extremeño”’. Hispania 97, no. 2
(2014): pp. 194–206.
Rutherford, John (trans.). Don Quixote, by Miguel de Cervantes (New York:
Penguin, 2000).
Sáenz, María Ascensión. ‘El juez de los divorcios o la institución matrimonial en
entredicho(s)’. In Memoria de la palabra: Actas del VI congreso de la Asociación
internacional Siglo de Oro, II, edited by María Luisa Lobato and Francisco
Domínguez Matito (Madrid; Frankfurt: Iberoamericana; Vervuert, 2004), pp.
1569–76.
Sáez, Adrián J. ‘De soldados, putas, y sífilis: Modelos y géneros literarios en
torno al Alférez Campuzano en “El casamiento engañoso”. Cervantes: Bulletin
of the Cervantes Society of America 34, no. 1 (2014): pp. 41–57.
Sáez, Adrián J. ‘Fortunas y adversidades de Pedro de Urdemalas, un pícaro
dramático’. Etiópicas: Revista de letras renacentistas 10 (2014): pp. 111–27.
Saéz, Adrián J. ‘Vida del capitán Ruy Pérez de Viedma: La autobiografía
soldadesca en Don Quijote (I.39)’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of
America 36, no. 1 (2016): pp. 85–104.
Sagastume, Jorge R. G. Cervantes novelador: Las Novelas ejemplares cuatrocientos
años después (Málaga: Fundación Málaga, 2014).
Sawhney, Minni. ‘Desire and Its Facilitators in Cervantes’s Los trabajos de Persiles
y Sigismunda’. Anuario de Estudios Cervantinos 5 (2009): pp. 295–306.
Scham, Michael. Lector Ludens: The Representation of Games and Play in Cervantes
(Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2014).
Schmidt, Rachel. Critical Images: The Canonization of Don Quixote through
Illustrated Editions of the Eighteenth Century (Montreal: McGill-Queen’s
University Press, 1999).
Schmidt, Rachel. Forms of Modernity: Don Quixote and Modern Theories of the
Novel (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2011).
Schmidt, Rachel. ‘The Intersection of Desire, Erotics, and National Identity in
Gustave Doré’s Don Quixote’. Review of Japanese Culture and Society 18 (2006):
pp. 12–31.
Schmitz, Ryan. ‘Cervantes’s Language of the Heart in the Novelas ejemplares and
Don Quijote’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 32, no. 2
(2012): pp. 171–95.
Schmitz, Ryan. ‘Sancho’s Courtly Performance: Discreción and the Art of
Conversation in the Ducal Palace Episodes of Don Quijote II’. Modern Language
Notes 128, no. 2 (2013): pp. 445–55.
Scholz, László and László Vasas. Cervantes y la narrativa moderna (Debrecen:
Kossuth Egyetemi Kiadó, 2001).
Sears, Theresa Ann. ‘Sacrificial Lambs and Domestic Goddesses; or, Did
Cervantes Write Chick Lit? (Being a Meditation on Women and Free Will)’.
Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 20, no. 1 (2000): pp. 47–
68.
Shuger, Dale. Don Quixote in the Archives: Madness and Literature in Early Modern
Spain (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2012).
Simerka, Barbara. ‘Mirror Neurons, Subjectivity, and Social Cognition in Don
Quixote’. In Don Quixote: Interdisciplinary Connections, edited by Matthew D.
Warshawsky and James A. Parr (Newark: Juan de la Cuesta, 2013), pp. 59–
82.
Simerka, Barbara and Christopher Weimer. ‘Don Quixote and Postmodern Film’.
In Approaches to Teaching Don Quixote, edited by James A. Parr and Lisa
Vollendorf (New York: Modern Language Association, 2015), pp. 126–32.
Simerka, Barbara and Christopher Weimer. ‘Duplicitous Diegesis: Don Quijote
and Charlie Kaufman’s Adaptation’. Hispania 88, no. 1 (2005): pp. 91–100.
Simerka, Barbara and Christopher Weimer. ‘“Ever Want to Be Someone Else?”
Self-Fashioning in Don Quijote and Being John Malkovich’. Anuario de Estudios
Cervantinos 2 (2005): pp. 45–54.
Simerka, Barbara and Christopher Weimer. ‘Two Characters Defying Their
Authors: Don Quijote and Stranger Than Fiction’. Anuario de Estudios
Cervantinos 4 (2008): pp. 281–97.
Simon, Julien. ‘Introduction to “Cognitive Cervantes”: Integrating Mind and
Cervantes’s Texts’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 32,
no. 1 (2012): pp. 11–23.
Simon, Julien. ‘The Intersection of Mind and Don Quijote: Overview and
Prospects’. In Don Quixote: Interdisciplinary Connections, edited by Matthew D.
Warshawsky and James A. Parr (Newark: Juan de la Cuesta, 2013), pp. 19–
34.
Simon, Julien, et al. ‘Cognitive Cervantes [Special Issue]’. Cervantes: Bulletin of
the Cervantes Society of America 32, no. 1 (2012): pp. 11–275.
Sliwa, Krzysztof. Documentos cervantinos: Nueva recopilación: Lista e índices (New
York: Peter Lang, 2000).
Smith, Dawn L. ‘Transformation and Fluidity in the Translation of Classical
Texts for Performance: The Case of Cervantes’s Entremeses’. In The Comedia in
English: Translation and Performance, edited by Susan Paun de García and
Donald R. Larson (Woodbridge: Tamesis, 2008), pp. 95–107.
Smith, Wendell P. ‘“Ver mundo”: Enchanted Boats, Atlases, and Imperial Magic
in the Second Part of Don Quijote’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of
America 32, no. 2 (2012): pp. 37–80.
Stackhouse, Kenneth A. ‘Beyond Performance: Cervantes’s Algerian Plays, El
trato de Argel and Los baños de Argel’. Bulletin of the Comediantes 52, no. 2
(2000): pp. 7–30.
Stam, Robert. Literature through Film: Realism, Magic, and the Art of Adaptation
(Oxford: Blackwell, 2005).
Stam, Robert. Reflexivity in Film and Literature: From Don Quixote to Jean-Luc
Godard (Ann Arbor: UMI Research Press, 1985).
Swanson, Philip. ‘Don Quijote y el detective postmoderno en la narrativa
hispanoamericana’. Foro Hispánico 40 (2010): pp. 263–79.
Syrovy, Daniel. Tilting at Tradition: Problems of Genre in the Novels of Miguel de
Cervantes and Charles Sorel (Amsterdam, Netherlands: Rodopi, 2013).
Thacker, Jonathan. A Companion to Golden Age Theatre (Woodbridge: Tamesis,
2007).
Thacker, Jonathan. ‘Lope de Vega, El cuerdo loco, and “la más discreta figura de
la comedia”’. Bulletin of Hispanic Studies 81, no. 4 (2004): pp. 463–78.
Thacker, Jonathan. ‘Sex, Treachery, and Really Big Moustaches: Cervantes’s
Entremeses at the Edinburgh Fringe Festival’. Comedia Performance 3, no. 1
(2006): pp. 185–99.
Thacker, Jonathan. ‘“Véote, y no te conozco”: The Unrecognizable Form of
Cervantes’s El rufián dichoso’. Hispanic Research Journal 10, no. 3 (2009): pp.
206–26.
Urbina, Eduardo. Anuario bibliográfico cervantino IV (Palma: Universitat de les
Illes Balears, 2001).
Urbina, Eduardo, dir. Proyecto Cervantes. http://www.cervantes.tamu.edu.
Urbina, Eduardo, et al. ‘Visual Knowledge: Textual Iconography of the Quixote,
a Hypertextual Archive’. Literary and Linguistic Computing 21, no. 2 (2006):
pp. 247–58.
Velasco, Sherry. ‘Magic, Medicine, Mythology, and the Male Member in Don
Quixote I.43’. In Don Quixote: Interdisciplinary Connections, edited by Matthew
D. Warshawsky and James A. Parr (Newark: Juan de la Cuesta, 2013), pp.
225–49.
Velasco, Sherry. Male Delivery: Reproduction, Effeminacy, and Pregnant Men in
Early Modern Spain (Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press, 2006).
Velasco, Sherry. ‘Marimachos, Hombrunas, Barbudas: The Masculine Woman in
Cervantes’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America, 20, no. 1
(2000): pp. 69–78.
Velasco, Sherry. ‘The Dueña Dolorida: Policing Gender, Desire, and
Entertainment’. Hispanic Review 77, no. 2 (2009): pp. 221–44.
Vélez-Sainz, Julio and Nieves Romero-Díaz. Cervantes and/on/in the New World
(Newark: Juan de la Cuesta, 2007).
Vélez Quiñones, Harry. ‘Barefoot and Fallen: Dorotea, Athena, Cervantes, and
Homer’. Romance Quarterly 52, no. 4 (2005): pp. 281–93.
Vélez Quiñones, Harry. ‘“Templa, pequeño joven, templa el brío”: Pretty Boys
and Queer Soldiers in Miguel de Cervantes’s Numancia’. In The Poetics of
Masculinity in Early Modern Italy and Spain, edited by Gerry Milligan, et al.
(Toronto: Centre for Reformation and Renaissance Studies, 2010), pp. 241–
65.
Vila, Juan Diego and Augustin Redondo. Peregrinar hacia la dama: El erotismo
como programa narrativo del Quijote (Kassel: Reichenberger, 2008).
Vollendorf, Lisa. ‘Reading Gender in Don Quixote’. In Approaches to Teaching Don
Quixote, edited by James A. Parr and Lisa Vollendorf (New York: Modern
Language Association, 2015), pp. 71–7.
Wagschal, Steven. ‘Digging up the Past: The Archeology of Emotion in
Cervantes’s “Romance de los celos”’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society
of America 27, no. 2 (2007): pp. 213–28.
Wagschal, Steven. The Literature of Jealousy in the Age of Cervantes (Columbia:
University of Missouri Press, 2006).
Walters, D. Gareth. ‘Performances of Pastoral in “La ilustre fregona”: Games
within the Game’. In A Companion to Cervantes’s Novelas ejemplares, edited
by Stephen Boyd (Woodbridge: Tamesis, 2005), pp. 207–20.
Wehrs, Donald R. ‘Affective Dissonance and Literary Mediation: Emotion
Processing, Ethical Signification, and Aesthetic Autonomy in Cervantes’s Art
of the Novel’. Cervantes: Bulletin of the Cervantes Society of America 32, no. 1
(2012): pp. 201–30.
Weimer, Christopher B. ‘Going to Extremes: Barthes, Lacan, and Cervantes’s La
Gran Sultana’. In Gender, Identity, and Representation in Spain’s Golden Age,
edited by Dawn L. Smith and Anita K. Stoll (Lewisburg: Bucknell University
Press, 2000), pp. 47–60.
Weimer, Christopher B. ‘Leaping New Media in a Single Bound: The Quixotic
Would-Be Superhero in Contemporary Graphic Fiction and Film’. In Don
Quixote: Interdisciplinary Connections, edited by Matthew D. Warshawsky and
James A. Parr (Newark: Juan de la Cuesta, 2013), pp. 85–106.
Weinberger, Christopher S. ‘Critical Desire and the Novel: Ethics of Self-
Consciousness in Cervantes and Nabokov’. Narrative 20, no. 3 (2012): pp.
277–300.
Weiner, Jeffrey Neil. ‘Amazement and the Experience of Transformation in the
Romances of Cervantes and Shakespeare’. Dissertation (Berkeley: University
of California, Berkeley, 2015).
Wilson, Diana de Armas. Cervantes, the Novel, and the New World (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2000).
Yamada, Yumiko. Ben Jonson and Cervantes: Tilting Against Chivalric Romances
(Tokyo: Maruzen, 2000).
Zafra, Enriqueta. ‘La prostituta y la prostitución en Don Quijote: Modelos de
“mujeres libres”’. Bulletin of Hispanic Studies 86, no. 5 (2009): pp. 625–40.
Zafra, Enriqueta. Prostituidas por el texto: Discurso prostibulario en la picaresca
femenina (West Lafayette: Purdue University Press, 2009).
Zimic, Stanislav. Los cuentos y las novelas del Quijote (Madrid; Frankfurt:
Iberoamericana; Vervuert, 2003).
1 Prominent examples of important scholarship that continues to build on
pre-2000 trends include: Boruchoff, ‘Free Will…’ and ‘On the Place of
Madness…’; Clamurro; Fine, Una lectura semiótico-narratológica…; Garrido
Domínguez; Gil-Oslé, Amistades imperfectas…; Lozano-Renieblas, ‘Género…’;
Márquez Villanueva; Presberg; Rico, ‘Poética…’, Tiempos del Quijote, and ‘El
título…’; Ruhe, ‘Prekäre Exemplarität…’; Shuger; Syrovy; and Zimic.
2 Also among the published material of the past two decades are several
important reference volumes and new editions and/or translations. Notable
reference volumes include: Astrana Marín and Sliwa; Boyd; Cascardi, The
Cambridge Companion…; Close; Fernández, Jaime; Mancing; Sliwa; and Urbina,
Bibliografía…; among others. New editions and translations include: Allen;
Grossman; Lathrop; Parr and Fajardo; Rico; and Rutherford.
3 See also Blue and Parr; Chen Sham; La Rubia Prado; Parr, ‘Celebrating 400
years…’; and Sagastume.
4 See Lucía Megías, La juventud de Cervantes, La madurez de Cervantes and La
plenitud de Cervantes.
5 Regarding this ‘Americas’ trend, see also Adorno; and Correa-Díaz and
Moreno.
6 Vélez-Sainz and Romero-Díaz, p. 7.
7 Wilson, p. 10.
8 Armstrong-Roche, Cervantes’ Epic Novel…, pp. 33–110.
9 See Burningham, ‘Os Manchíadas’; and Smith, Wendell.
10 See Miñana, ‘The Don Quixote of the Streets’. See also Iffland,
‘Mangled…’.
11 See also Alonso, ‘Cervantes y los mapas…’; Lewis; and Pinet, ‘On the
Subject…’ and ‘Theatrum Mundi…’.
12 See López Baralt, ‘Apostillas árabes…’, ‘Un morisco Ricote…’ and ‘El
sabio…’; López Baralt and McCabe, ‘The Supreme Pen…’; Mata Indurain; and
McGaha, ‘La Gran Sultana…’ and ‘Reading Don Quixote in Istanbul’; See also
Brown; Fine, ‘En torno…’; Johnson, Paul Michael, ‘Expulsión…’; López Baralt,
‘Apostillas árabes…’, ‘Un morisco Ricote…’ and ‘El sabio…’; and Lozano-
Renieblas, ‘Huellas y nostalgias…’.
13 See also Avilés, ‘War and the Material Conditions…’; de Armas, Don
Quixote Among the Saracens; Díez Fernández, ‘Juegos de máscara…’ and ‘“Sin
discrepar…’; Fastrup’; Fuchs, Passing for Spain; Lezra; and Ohanna, ‘Heterodoxos
en cautiverio…’ and ‘Lamentos…’.
14 See Irigoyen-García, ‘Cervantes y la trata de blancas…’, ‘La expulsión de
los moriscos…’, ‘“La música ha sido hereje”…’, ‘“Poco os falta para moros…’,
and ‘El problema morisco…’.
15 Garcés, p. 19.
16 Childers, p. 40.
17 Garcés, p. 28.
18 De Armas, Don Quixote among the Saracens…, p. 6.
19 Childers, pp. 3–13.
20 Mann, p. 8.
21 See also Scholz and Vasas.
22 Schmidt, Forms of Modernity…, p. 17.
23 Schmidt, Forms of Modernity…, p. ix. See also Martín Morán.
24 Bloom, Shakespeare…, p. xvii.
25 Bakhtin, p. 324.
26 Bloom, The Western Canon…, p. 134.
27 Graf, pp. 33–4, 11.
28 Quint, p. x. On modernity, see also Bandera; Ciallella; Martín Morán; and
Puig.
29 Johnson, Carroll, Cervantes and the…, p. 11.
30 See also Leahy.
31 Egginton, p. iii.
32 Egginton, p. xvi.
33 Hall, p. 104.
34 Hall, p. 107.
35 Reed, ‘Scientific…’, p. 67.
36 Burton, p. 141; Lorca, p. 115.
37 Gasta, p. 55.
38 Ramírez, p. 86. On the Montesino’s Cave episode as virtual reality
videogame, see Beusterien, ‘Reading Cervantes…’, p. 430.
39 Gabriele, ‘Narrative Prisms and Prisons…’, p. 31.
40 See Simerka and Weimer, ‘Duplicitous Diegesis’, ‘“Ever Want to Be…?”’,
‘Two Characters…’, and ‘Don Quixote…’.
41 Simerka and Weimer, ‘Duplicitous…’, p. 91.
42 Álvarez Blanco, p. 266.
43 Swanson, p. 263.
44 Miñana, Monstruos…, p. 22.
45 Castillo, David, Baroque Horrors, p. 21.
46 Childers, p. ix.
47 Childers, pp. 3–43; 194–222.
48 See also Friedman, ‘Bearing the Weight…’; Iffland, ‘Don Quijote…’;
Montero Reguera, ‘Un cervantista mexicano…’; and Pérez de León, ‘Síndromes
cervantinos…’.
49 See Gil-Oslé, ‘Hyperreality…’; Lee; and Powell.
50 Ardila, pp. vii–viii.
51 Randall and Boswell, p. xvi. See also Barrio Mano and Crespo Allué; and
Yamada.
52 See Eisenberg.
53 Chartier and Lloyd, p. 170.
54 See also Bourus and Taylor; and Hamilton.
55 See Chapter 29 of this volume for a study of Cervantes on screen.
56 See Maughan; McGraw; and Perez, Karen.
57 Castillo, David, ‘The Literary Classics…’; On Motorcycle Diaries, see also
Majfud.
58 Domínguez, ‘Luces…’, p. 24.
59 Donnell, p. 92.
60 Stam, Literature Through Film, p. 40.
61 Stam, Literature Through Film, p. 51.
62 Stam, Literature Through Film, pp. 307–70.
63 See also Iffland, ‘Seeing Is Believing…’.
64 See also de Armas, Quixotic Frescoes; and López Alemany, ‘Ut Pictura Non
Poesis…’.
65 See also Lucía Megías, ‘Don Quijote…’; and Urbina, ‘Visual Knowledge…’.
66 Vollendorf, ‘Reading Gender…’, p. 71.
67 See Brownlee; Cruz, ‘Dorotea’s Revenge…’ and ‘Redressing Dorotea…’;
Garst-Santos; Hernández Pecoraro, ‘Don Quijote’s Dorotea…’; Lauer, ‘The
Protean Dorotea…’; Parker; and Vélez Quiñones, ‘Barefoot and Fallen…’. See
also Anderson; Hernández, ‘“La fuerza del amor”…’; and Lauer, ‘Las
estrategias…’.
68 Nadeau, Women…, p. 9.
69 Zafra, Prostituidas…, p. 110. See also Zafra, ‘La prostituta y la
prostitución…’.
70 See Navas Ocaña, ‘Cervantes y la crítica feminista’ and ‘Lecturas feministas
de Cervantes’; and Sears, ‘Sacrificial Lambs…’.
71 See also Cruz, ‘Psyche and Gender…’; Lauer, ‘Altisidora…’; Novillo-
Corvalán; Ruiz, Carrie; and Vila and Redondo.
72 See Bergmann; Kristiansen; and Weimer, ‘Going to Extremes…’.
73 Rouhi; Ruiz, Eduardo; and Schmidt, Rachel, ‘The Intersection of Desire…’.
74 Martín, Erotic Philology…, pp. 41–2.
75 Cartagena-Calderón; Mártinez Góngora, El hombre atemperado…and ‘Un
unicornio…’; and Velasco, Male Delivery…, ‘Marimachos…’, and ‘Magic…’. See
also Fuchs, ‘Empire Unmanned…’; Johnson, Paul Michael; Quinn; and Sáez, ‘De
soldados…’ and ‘Vida del capitán…’.
76 Velasco, ‘The Dueña Dolorida…’, pp. 240–1.
77 See Altmann; and Vélez Quiñones, ‘Templa, pequeño joven,…’.
78 See Mancing, ‘Applying Theory of Mind…’, ‘Embodied Cognitive
Science…’, and ‘The Mind of a Pícaro…’. See also Connor, ‘Beyond
Cognition…’, ‘Cervantes’ Legacy…’, ‘Seeing Like and Sancho…’; Jaén,
‘Cervantes 
and 
the 
Cognitive 
Theories…’, 
‘Cervantes 
on 
Human
Development…’, and ‘Teaching Cervantes’s Don Quixote…’; Simerka, ‘Mirror
Neurons…’; and Simon, ‘Introduction to “Cognitive Cervantes”’ and ‘The
Intersection of Mind and Don Quijote…’.
79 Simon, ‘Introduction…’, p. 11.
80 See Cohen; Gretter; and Weiner.
81 See Camacho Morfín; González; Hutchinson, ‘Affective Dimensions…’ and
‘“Los primeros movimientos…’; Schmitz, ‘Cervantes’s Language of the Heart…’;
Wagschal, The Literature of Jealousy…, and ‘Digging up the Past…’; and Wehrs.
82 See Alcalá-Galán, ‘“Dios te dé salud…’; Anderson; Armstrong-Roche,
‘Imperial 
Theater…’; 
Brioso 
Santos; 
Castillo, 
Moisés, 
‘Espacios 
de
ambigüedad…’ and ‘¿Ortodoxia cervantina?…’; García Reidy; Kahn, ‘Even
Further 
Towards 
a 
Theory 
of 
Attribution…’, 
‘Representation 
and
Interpretation…’, and ‘Towards a Theory of Attribution…’; Madroñal; Maestro,
Cervantes en escena, ‘Cervantes y el teatro…’, La escena imaginaria…, ‘Miguel de
Cervantes y el teatro…’, El mito de la interpretación…, and ‘El triunfo de la
heterodoxia…’; Morillo; Sáez, ‘Fortunas y adversidades…’; Sáenz; Smith, Dawn;
Stackhouse; and Thacker, A Companion…, ‘Lope de Vega…’, ‘Sex, Treachery,
and Really Big Moustaches…’, and ‘“Véote, y no te conozco”…’.
83 See Fernández, Esther, ‘En busca…’ and ‘Viaje del Parnaso…’; and
Fernández and Ruiz, ‘Una mesa…’.
84 See also Walters.
85 See also Jehenson and Donne; and Weinberger.
86 See Avilés, ‘War and the Material Conditions…’ and ‘Expanding the
Self…’; Corteguera; and Lewis-Smith.
87 See Martín, ‘Berganza, comediante…’ and ‘Onstage/Backstage…’.
88 Nadeau, Food Matters…, p. xii.
89 See Bearden; and Burningham, ‘Eco-Performativity…’
Index
For the benefit of digital users, indexed terms that span two pages (e.g., 52–53)
may, on occasion, appear on only one of those pages
A
Academia de los Entronados 531
Mistranslation from Italian 531
Academia de los Humildes de Villamanta 535
Academia de los Imitadores 532–3, 535
Academia del Parnaso 537–8
Academia de Saldaña 532
Academia Imitatoria 535
Academia Selvaje 13, 537–8
‘Adjunta al Parnaso’ (1614) xxviii, xxxv–xxxvi, 336, 340, 391–393, 445–6, 461–463,
468–9, 472, 475, 521–4, 527, 531, 533–4, 537–8
Aethiopica by Heliodorus 18, 242 n21, 258–61, 258 n2, 265, 267, 269–75, 277–278,
283, 507–508, 527–8, 641–2
Aguilar, Gaspar (1561–1623) 447
‘A la entrada del Duque de Medina en Cádiz’ 42–3
Alba, Fernando Álvarez de Toledo, Duke of (1507–82) 57–8, 342
Alcázar, Baltasar del (1530–1606) 535
Alcuña, Hernando de (1520–80) 228
Aldana, Francisco de (1540–78) 228
Alemán, Mateo (1547–1615) 16, 240–1, 264–5, 328–9, 400, 493–4, 535, 542, 626
Guzmán de Alfarache, Part I (1599) 16, 176 n7, 240–2, 264–5, 327–9, 400, 493–4,
626
Guzmán de Alfarache, Part II (1604) 632–633
Alpujarras, morisco revolt (1568–71) 133–4
‘Al túmulo de Felipe II en Sevilla’ 43, 518
Álvarez de Soria, Alonso (1573–1603) 535
Amadís de Gaula (1508) by Garci Rodríguez de Montalvo 43–4, 88–9, 95, 176–7,
202, 480, 492–493, 495, 498–9, 501
Amyot, Jacques (1513–93) 259–60
Angelica: or Quixote in Petticoats (1758) by Anonymous 556
Ángulo, Andrés de 539–40
Anne of Austria, Queen of France (1601–66) 17
Arabic literary tradition 176
Aretino, Pietro (1492–1556) 450
‘Carta a Gianiacopo Lionardi’ (1536) 451
Argensola, Bartolomé Leonardo de (1562–1631) 176 n7, 447, 456, 533
Argensola, Lupercio Leonardo de (1559–1613) 176 n7, 391, 447, 456, 470, 497, 516,
526, 533–5
Arguijo, Juan de (1567–1622) 535–6
Arias, Ron (1941–) 579
Road to Tamazunchale, The (1975) 579
Ariosto, Ludovico (1474–1533) 89, 96, 103, 105–6, 228, 275, 361–2, 450, 501–2,
524
Orlando furioso (1516–32) 89, 96, 103, 105–6, 228, 275, 361–2, 450, 501–2, 524
Aristophanes (d. c.386BC) 449–50
Aristotle 105–6, 122–3, 170, 194, 208–9, 259–60, 300–1, 315–6, 456, 504–506,
523–4
Poetics 105–6, 259–60, 315–6, 504–5, 523–4
Artieda, Andrés Rey de (1549–1613) 347, 391, 470, 516, 539–40
Astrana Marín, Luis (1889–1959) 596–8
Auden, W.H. (1907–73) 142–3
Austen, Jane (1775–1817) 555–6
Northanger Abbey (1798) 556
Avellaneda, Alonso Fernández de xxxi, 6–7, 15–8, 28, 47, 136–8, 144–5, 149–72,
186, 242, 306–7, 498–9, 501–2, 522, 528, 541, 638–40
Identity question 149–50, 541
Segundo tomo del ingenioso hidalgo don Quixote de la Mancha (1614) xxxi, 6–7, 15–
8, 28, 47, 136–8, 144–5, 149–72, 186, 242, 306–7, 501–2, 522, 528, 541, 638–
40
Comparison with Don Quixote 152–3, 155, 157–72
El rico desesperado 151
Los felices amantes 151
Madness in 155–6, 306–7
Prologue 157, 528
Reception of 149–50
Aviñon, Juan de (1381–1418) 300–1
Sevillana medicina (1545) 300–1
Ayres, James 553
Sancho at Court; or, The Mock Governor (1742) 553
Aznar, José María (1953–) 611, 614–5
B
Bakhtin, Mikhail (1895–1975) 153–4, 209, 306, 319, 329, 653–4
Balbuena, Bernardo de (1568–1627) 452
El Bernardo (1610) 451
Bandello, Matteo (c.1480–1562) 238, 500–1, 634
Novelle (1554–73) 238, 500–1, 634
Barrett, Eaton Stannard (1786–1820) 556
Heroine, The (1813) 556
Baudoin, Nicholas 548–9
Le Curieux Impertinent (1608) 548–9
Beaumont, Francis (1584–1616) 118, 548–50, 565–6
Coxcomb, The (1608–10) with Fletcher 118, 548–9
Knight of the Burning Pestle, The (1612) 548–9, 565–6
Love’s Pilgrimage (1615) 549–50
Beauvoir, Simone de (1908–86) 204
Belanís de Grecia (1545) by Jerónimo Fernández 43–4, 176–7
Bellay, Joachim du (1522–60) 499
Bembo, Pietro (1470–1547) 450, 502
Bermúdez, Jerónimo (1530–1605) 341–2, 470
Bernardo del Carpio 39, 361–2, 474–5, 480–81
Berni, Francesco (1497–1536) 450
Boccaccio, Giovanni (1313–75) 238, 277 n73, 495, 498–502, 634
Decameron, The (c.1348–53) 238, 277 n73, 499–500, 634
De mulieribus claris (1374) 499–500
Elegia di Madonna Fiammetta (1343) 495, 499–500
Il corbaccio (c. 1355) 499–500
Boccalini, Traiano (1556–1613) 451
I Ragguagli di Parnaso (1612) 451
Boiardo, Mateo (1441–94) 23–24, 361–2, 501–2, 506–7
Orlando Innamorato (1483–95) 23, 361–2, 501–2, 506–7
Borges, Jorge Luis (1899–1986) 114–115, 143–4, 170, 577
‘Libraries of Babel, The’ (1941) 143–4
‘Pierre Menard, author of Don Quixote’ (1939) 577
Boscán, Juan (1490–1542) 228, 291, 418, 499
Bunyan, John (1628–88) 552
Pilgrim’s Progress, The (1678) 552
Buñuel, Luis (1900–83) 603–4
Burgess, Anthony (1917–1933) 564–5
‘A Meeting in Valladolid’ (1982) 564–5
Burton, Robert (1577–1640) 551
Anatomy of Melancholy, The (1621) 551
Bush, George W. (1946–) 580
as quixotic 580
Butler, Bishop John (1692–1752) 191
Butler, Samuel (1613–80) 552
Hudibras (1663–64, 1678) 552
C
Caesar Augustus (63 bc–14 ad) 282
Calderón de la Barca, Pedro (1600–81) 409–410, 422–3
Camões, Luís de (1524–80) 24, 642–3
Camus, Mario (1935–) 610–11, 614
Fortuna y Jacinta (1980) 610–11
Canavaggio, Jean (1936–) 598–9
‘Canción primera a la Armada Invencible’ 42
Caporali, Cesare (1531–1601) 446–7, 449–50, 461, 502
‘Avisii di Parnaso’ (1582) 450, 461
Viaggio di Parnaso (1582) 449–51, 461, 502
Carvalho, Antonio (1590–1650) 384 n15
Un discurso sobre si conviene que los predicadores reprehendan príncipes y ministros
(1626) 384–5
Carvallo, Luis Alfonso de (1571–1635) 452–3
El cisne de Apolo (1602) 452–3
Casa, Giovanni della (1503–56) 450
Casas, Bartolomé de las (1484–1566) 285–6, 592
Castiglione, Baldassare (1478–1529) 291, 504–5
Il Cortegiano (1528) 291, 504–5
Castillejo, Cristóbal de (1490–1550) 228
Castro, Guillén de (1569–1631) 447
Catallus (c. 84–c. 54 BC)
Cela, Camilo José (1916–2002) 603
La Colmena (1951) 603
Celestina (1499) 16, 260–61, 325
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de (1547–1616)
Americas, The, in Cervantes’s works 574–576
Ambiguity xxviii–xxix, 25
Ancestry of 5
Attributions xxxv, 467–84
Theatre 468–476
Entremeses 476–8
Baptism xxvii, 4–5
Biographers of xxxvi, 587–98
Biography of xxx, 3–19
Biopics of 605–11
Birth of 4–5
Captivity (1575–80) xxvii–xxviii, xxx–xxxi, 7–8, 26–27, 39–40, 51–78, 237, 247,
339, 363
Childhood xxvii, 4–6
Criticism (scholarly) of see Criticism
Death xxix, 19, 257
and Empire xxx, 38–48
and Genre xxxiii, 315–29
and Greek Philosophers 192–5
Imprisonment 10–11
Influences and sources xxxv, 176–7
and Literary circles xxxv–xxxvi, 531–43
and Madness (see also Don Quixote de la Mancha)xxxiii, 297–311
Marriage 8–9
Other, the 394–407
and Philosopy xxxii
Poetry of xxxiv, 433–40
Reception of 433–6
Portrait of (attributed to Jáuregui) 13–14, 14 n22, 535–6
Pre-Lopean Drama (1580s) 335–48
Reception in Britain xxxvi, 546–67
Reception in Europe 17
Reception in the Americas xxxvi, 572–81, 650–51
Sources 491–510
and Warfare xxx, 21–36
Exemplary Warfare 33–6
Céspedes, Pablo de (1538–1608) 535
Chaparro Valderrama, Hugo (1961–) 577
‘El sueño de Cide Hamete Benengeli’ (2004) 577
Chapman, Robin (1933–) 559, 561–63, 566
Duchess’s Diary, The (1980) 561–62
Pasamonte’s Life (2005) 561–63
Sancho’s Golden Age (2004) 561–63
Shakespeare’s Don Quixote (2011) 564, 566
Charles I, King of Spain (1516–1556) see Charles V
Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor (1519–1558) xxx, xxxv, 4–5, 38–44, 47–48, 260–
61, 339, 515
as Aeneas 42
Death of 260–61
as Julius Caesar 39
as Marcus Aurelius 39
Chaucer, Geoffrey (1343–1400) 500
Canterbury Tales, The (1399) 500
Chesterton, G.K. (1874–1936) 559–61
Ball and the Cross, The (1910) 560
Napoleon of Notting Hill, The (1905) 560
‘Parody of Don Quixote, The’ (1901) 559–560
Return of Don Quixote, The (1927) 559–61
Chrétien de Troyes (1135?–85?) 88–9, 134–5
Cide Hamete Benengeli xxviii–xxix, 94–6, 99, 112, 119–20, 127–9, 144, 165, 167–9,
176, 178–86, 194, 198, 243, 307, 558, 561–62, 577, 580–581, 651–3
Colman, George (1732–94) 556
Polly Honeycomb (1760) 556
Comedia nueva xxviii, xxxiv, 319–21, 355–8, 361, 366–7, 371–2, 391–407, 468–9,
471, 474–5, 497, 516, 518–21, 525–6, 529, 637–8
Congregación del Santísimo Sacramento (Academia) 537
Constantinople, Fall of (1453) 44–5, 473–4
Córdoba, Juan de (1503–95) 230
Correas, Gonzalo (1571–1631) 409
Arte de la lengua española (1592) 409
Cortés, Hernán (1485–1547) 574–5
Council of Trent (1545–63) 4–5, 105–6
Counter-Reformation 151–2, 171, 190, 353–67, 369, 391–2, 498, 515
Criticism (scholarly) of xxxvi, 5, 625–43, 648–64
Crowne, John (1641–1712) 551
Married Beau: or, The Curious Impertinent, The (1694) 551
Cruz, San Juan de la (1542–91) 344–5, 436
Cántico espiritual (1579) 344–5
Cueva, Juan de la (1543–1612) xxxiii, 335, 338, 341–2, 347, 391, 418, 452 n23,
470, 535
El Coro Febeo de Romances historiales (1587) 452 n23
Viaje de Sannio (1585) 452
Cueva y Silva, Francisco de la (1550–1621) 536
D
Dante Alighieri (d. 1321) 228, 338, 450–2, 498–9, 501–2, 506–7, 579, 642–3
Divine Comedy (1320) 338, 451–2, 498–9, 506–7
Darío, Rubén (1867–1916) 576–7
‘Letanía de nuestro señor don Quijote’ (1605) 576–7
Dekker, Thomas (1572–1632) 548–50
Spanish Gipsy, The (1623) 549–50
Witch of Edmonton, The (1623) 548–9
Derrida, Jacques (1930–2004) 194–5
Descartes, René (1596–1650) 191, 197–200, 203
Discourse on Method (1637) 197–8
Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) 197–8
Desicorides, Pedanius (d. 90 AD) 300–1, 475
Materia medica translated by Andrés Laguna (1554) 300–1, 475
‘Diálogo entre Cilenia y Selanio sobre la vida del campo sacado en limpio’
(attributed) 478–80
Date of Composition 478–80
as Las semanas del jardín 478–80
Díaz Rengifo, Juan (1553–1615) 409
Ars poética española (1592) 409
Dickens, Charles (1812–70) 555, 558
Posthumous Papers of the Pickwick Club, The (1837) 558
Oliver Twist (1837–8) 558
Dido, Queen of Carthage 265, 276–277, 506–7
Don Quixote de la Mancha, Part I (1605) and Part II (1615) xxvii–xxix, xxxi, xxxiii,
xxxv–xxxvi, 6–7, 11–12, 16–18, 23, 26–28, 36, 42–46, 48, 51–52, 57–59, 75–
76, 87–115, 118–119, 152–3, 159, 223, 233–4, 236–237, 240–2, 257–259,
266–7, 286, 292, 316–20, 327–9, 340, 391, 393, 422–3, 433, 436–439, 456,
463–464, 472, 474–476, 481, 491–494, 496–7, 499, 501–509, 519–22, 524,
526–529, 532–4, 538–41, 546–547, 551, 553–64, 572–81, 602–3, 626–33,
636–41
Altisadora 131, 141–2, 165, 498–9
Ambiguities in 127–128, 133–4, 138
Ana Félix 138–9, 164
Anagnorisis in 317
and Art of fiction, the 105–7
Barataria, Island of 132–4, 160–61, 503
and Baroque Philosophy 197–9
Camacho’s wedding 126
Canon of Toledo 104–7, 157, 193, 497, 505–6, 519–20, 522–4
Cardenio (Interpolated Tale) 100–101, 240, 495, 498–9, 507–9
‘Cart of the Parliament of Death’ 124–7
Cave of Montesinos 126–8, 135, 464, 498–9, 506–9
Clavileño 192, 506–7
Countess Trifaldi 131, 192, 194
Death of Don Quixote 144
Dolorous Duenna 131
Duke and Duchess 129–136, 141–2, 161, 192, 307, 506–7
Economics in 142
El curioso impertinente 7, 31–32, 51–52, 101, 118, 237–239, 238 n11, 243, 309–
310, 501–2, 548–551, 631–3
Madness in 309–311
Suicide in 309–310
Translation into French (1608) by Nicholas Baudoin 548–9
Film adaptation of (1949) by Rafael Gil (1913–86) 602–605
Ginés de Pasamonte 16, 32–33, 128–129, 328–9, 493–4, 551–552, 563, 641
Grisóstomo 99–100, 309–310, 494–499, 506, 631–632
‘La canción desesperada’ 309–310, 496–7
Suicide of 309–310
Hamartia 123–124
and King Arthur 88
La historia del cautivo (Captive’s Tale) 32–33, 57–59, 61–63, 71, 76, 101–102, 237,
240, 243, 366, 472, 558, 631–3
and Libros de caballeria (Books of chivalry) 88–99, 106–107, 114, 131, 135, 142,
176–7
Madness in 89–92, 107–110, 123–124, 134–5, 143–4, 146, 298–299, 301–310
Marcela 99–100, 494
Maese Pedro 16, 128–129, 493–4, 551–552, 563
and Metafiction 94–6
and Modernism and Postmodernism 195–197
Narrative structure in xxxii, 98–105, 175–186
Peripeteia in 123–124, 316–317
Perspectivism in 96–99
Philosophy and humour 189–209
Poetry in 433, 436–439
Prologue to Part I 112–115, 144, 157, 179, 183–184, 208, 319–320, 493, 503–
504, 519, 521, 523–4
Cervantes’s literary isolation in 521
Lope de Vega in 519
Prologue to Part II 145, 157–158
Ricote 133–4, 138–9
and Romances of chivalry 88–9
Sansón Carrasco 118–120, 125, 139–141, 143–4, 164–165, 182–183, 194, 243,
298–299, 306–309, 603–4
as Knight of the White Moon 139–141, 145, 164, 303, 306, 551–552
Translation into English by Thomas Shelton (1612) 13, 118, 546, 564, 577–578
Translation into English by Tobias Smollett (1755) 554–555, 578
Translation into French (1615) 199
Warfare in 21, 23, 26–31
Drake, Sir Francis (c. 1540–96) 518
Dryden, John (1631–1700) 550–551
Fables Ancient and Modern (1700) 550–551
Rival Ladies, The (1664) 551
D’Urfey, Thomas (1653–1723) 548, 551–552
Comical History of Don Quixote, The (1694–6) 548, 551–552
E
Ebreo, León (1464–1530) 504–5
Dialogues of Love (1530) 504–5
Edgeworth, Maria (1768–1849) 556
‘Angelina’ (1801) 556
Egido, Luciano G. (1928–) 604–605
Los caminos de Don Quijote (1961) 604–605
El amante liberal (1613) 26–27, 32–36, 46, 51–52, 55, 65–69, 245, 248 n38, 253,
500–1, 634–636
El bosque amoroso (lost play) 336, 469, 474–5
as La casa de los celos 474–5
El Buscapié (attributed) 483
El casamiento engañoso (1613) 72, 244–245, 251, 500–1, 549–50, 634–636
El celoso extremeño (1613) 10, 13–14, 239, 244–245, 244 n29, 253, 309–311, 316–
317, 321–329, 482, 500–1, 574–5, 631–632, 634–635
Jealousy in 309–311, 322–323
El coloquio de los perros (1613) 72, 241, 244–247, 251, 253–254, 327–328, 391, 433,
493–4, 500–1, 503, 505, 532–3, 535, 539, 577, 634–636
Poetry in 433
El Conde Lucanor (1335) by Don Juan Manuel (1282–1348) 238
El entremés de Doña Justina y Calahorra (attributed) 476–477
El gallardo español (1615) 51–52, 62–65, 363–368
El Greco (1541–1614) 344–5
Alegoría de la Liga Santa (1579) 344–5
El hospital de los podridos (attributed) 476–8
Eliot, George (1819–80) 555, 558
Middlemarch (1871–2) 558
Mill on the Floss, The (1860) 558
Elisio de Medinilla, Baltasar (1585–1620) 541
Elizabeth I, Queen of England (1558–1603) 34, 46–48, 70–71
El juez de los divorcios (1615) 382–384, 389, 424, 477–478
El laberinto de amor (1615) 358–363, 365
Labyrinth motif in 360–361
Representation of women in 360
El licenciado Vidriera (1613) 7, 199, 245–247, 253, 298–299, 305–306, 327–328,
433, 464, 493–4, 503, 574–5, 634–635
Madness in 298–299, 305–306
Poetry in 433
Elorrieta, José María (1921–74) 604–605
Por tierras de Don Quijote (1946) 604–605
El retablo de las maravillas (1615) 60, 76–77, 378, 384–387, 389, 424, 497
El rufián dichoso (1615) 10, 14–15, 320–321, 368–373, 393–394, 420, 424, 523–527,
637–8
Allegorical characters in 369, 525, 637–8
as a comedia de santos / comedia divina 320–321, 368–370, 525
Meta-theatre in 369–370
Versification in 420
El rufián viudo llamado Trampagos (1615) 379, 383–384, 389, 425–426, 438, 477
Poetry in 438
El trato de Argel, see Los tratos de Argel
El trato de Constantinopla y muerte de Selím (1585; lost play) 473
El viejo celoso (1615) 322–323, 384–5, 387, 389, 424–425, 549–50
El vizcaíno fingido (1615) 384–5, 387, 389–390, 424
Encina, Juan del (1468–1529?) 424
Epístola a Mateo Vázquez (1577?) 639
Erasmus (Desiderius Erasmus (1469–1536) xxvii, 132–133, 154, 303–306, 502–505,
534–535
De copia (1512) 388–389
Education of a Christian Prince (1516) 504–5
Encomium Matrimonii (1518) 503
Praise of Folly (1509) 155, 303–306, 503
Ercilla, Alonso de (1533–94) 23–24, 26–27, 31–32, 229, 418, 480, 497
Araucana, La (1569–89) 23, 26–27, 31–32, 229, 418, 480, 497
Escrivá, Vicente (1913–99) 606
Dulcinea (1963) 606
Espinosa, Pedro de (1578–1650) 542–543
Flores de poetas ilustres en España (1605) 542
Essex, Robert Devereux, Earl of (1565–1601) 639
Examen de ingenios para las ciencias [Scientific Examination of Men’s Wits] (1575) by
Juan Huarte de San Juan (1529–88) 178, 298–299, 302–303
Expulsion of the moriscos (1609) xxviii–xxix, 13–14, 74–75, 133–4, 138, 260–61, 286
F
Famoso Bernado (lost work) 480–81
Faulkner, William (1897–1962) 579
Fernández de Navarrete, Martín (1785–1844) 592–593
Fernández Santos, Jesús (1926–88) 607–608
El licenciado Vidriera (1974) 607–608
Ferrer, Luis (d. 1641) 447
Field, Nathan (1587–1620) 548–9
Amends for Ladies (1611) 548–9
Fielding, Henry (1707–54) 552–555, 627–628
Don Quixote in England (1728) 552–553
History of the Adventures of Joseph Andrews, The (1742) 553–554, 627–628
History of Tom Jones, a Foundling (1749) 555
Fitzmaurice-Kelly, James (1857–1923) 593–596
Flaubert, Gustave (1821–80) 630
Madame Bovary (1857) 629–630
Fletcher, John (1579–1625) 118, 548–50, 552, 564, 566–567
Chances, The (1613–25) 549–50
Coxcomb, The (1608–10) with Beaumont 118, 548–9
Custom of the Country, The (1625) 258, 550–551
History of Cardenio, The (1613) with Shakespeare 118, 548–9, 552, 564–567
Double Falsehood by Theobold as 552, 564–566
Love’s Pilgrimage (1615) 549–50
Rule a Wife and Have a Wife (1624) 549–50
Ford, John (1586–1639) 516–518
Fair Maid of the Inn, The (1625) 549–50
Spanish Gipsy, The (1623) 549–50
Witch of Edmonton, The (1623) 548–9
Forqué, José María (1923–95) 607
Un diablo bajo la almohada (1968) 607
Foucault, Michel (1926–84) 191–192, 197, 204, 298
The Order of Things (1966) 191
Fowles, John (1926–2005) 559
French Lieutenant’s Woman, The (1969) 559
Francis I, King of France (1515–47) 4–5
Franco, Francisco (1892–1975) 601–602
Franco dictatorship (1936–75) 601–602
Franklin, Benjamin (1706–90) 578
Freud, Sigmund (1856–1939) 203–204
G
Galatea, La (1585) xxxii–xxxiii, xxxv, 6–7, 9, 11–12, 16, 26–27, 42, 51–52, 54, 56–
57, 215–230, 233, 237–238, 240–1, 259, 316–317, 422–3, 433, 436–437, 454–
455, 474–5, 478–479, 491–492, 495–497, 499, 504–5, 507–508, 516–517,
527–8, 533–5, 625–627, 632–633
‘Canto de Calíope’ 218–219, 228–231, 418, 436–437, 454–455, 497, 517–518,
539, 541
Homicide in 219, 220, 221t
Interpolated stories in 240
Kidnapping in 220, 221t
Lope de Vega in 516–517
Meta-literary dialogues in 316–317
Orphic Poet 215–230
Petrarchan tropes in 316–317
Poetry in 433, 436–437
Prologue 216, 223, 228
Rota Virgilii 215–230
Suicidal thoughts in 220, 221t
Galatea, La, Part II (lost novel) 481–482
Galileo Galilei (1564–1642) 191
Galvadón, Roberto (1909–86) 608–609
Don Quijote cabalga de nuevo (1973) 608–609
Gayton, Edmund (1608–66) 551–552
Pleasant Notes upon Don Quixote (1654) 551–552
Generation of ’98 205, 600–601, 628
Gil, Rafael (1913–86) 602–605
Don Quixote (1947) 602–605
Gilliam, Terry (1940–) 546–547, 566, 612
Man who Killed Don Quixote, The (2018) 546–547, 566–567, 612
Failed attempt (see also Lost in La Mancha), 546–547, 566, 612
Gil Polo, Gaspar (1540–84) 494, 626
Diana enamorada (1565) 494
Giraldo Cinthio, Giovanni Battista (1504–73) 238, 634
Hecatommithi (1565) 238
Goffman, Erving (1922–82) 199–204
The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life (1956) 204
Gómez Valderrama, Pedro (1923–92) 572–573
‘En un lugar de las Indias’ (1973) 572–573
Góngora, Luis de (1561–1627) 178, 267–269, 422–3, 497, 518–519, 533–536, 539
Las soledades (1613) 267, 269
González, Felipe (1942–) 610–11
Graves, Richard (1715–1804) 556–557
Spiritual Quixote, or The Summer’s Ramble of Mr Geoffrey Wildgoose, The (1773)
556–557
Greene, Graham (1904–91) 559, 561
Monsignor Quixote (1982) 561
Guerras civiles de Granda (1606) by Ginés Pérez de Hita (1544–1619) 63
Guevara, Antonio de (1481–1545) 39, 44, 259–60, 285–287, 292, 499–500
Relox de príncipes (1529) 286, 499–500
‘Villano del Danubio’ 286
Gutiérrez Aragón, Manuel (1940–) 613–615
El caballero Don Quijote (2002) 614
La noche más Hermosa (1984) 613–614
Maravillas (1981) 613–614
H
Hartley, L.P. (1895–1972) 559
Love Adept, The (1969) 559
Henry VIII, King of England (1509–47) 4–5
Herrera, Fernando de (1534–97) 409, 422–3
Anotaciones (1580) 409
Herrera, Francisco de (1576–1656) 178
Hobbes, Thomas (1588–1679) 197–8
Homer 44, 228, 230, 273, 276–277, 505–507, 509
Iliad, The 505–6
Odyssey, The 273, 276–277, 505–507
Horace (64–8 BC) 228, 315–6, 324, 372, 454–456, 523–4
Ars poetica 315–6, 324
Hospitals and Medical Texts 298–303
La casa del nuncio (hospital) 306–7
La casa de los locos (hospital) 298–299
Hurtado de Mendoza, Diego (1504–75) 228, 497
I
Index of Prohibited Books (1559) 4–5, 238, 634
Isabel de Valois, Queen of Spain (1545–68) 5–6
Islamic invasion of Spain (711 AD) 286
J
Jacinto, St (1183–1257) 533
Canonization of (1596) 533
Poem by Cervantes 533
James, Henry (1843–1916) 555
Jáuregui, Juan de (1583–1641) 535–6
Portrait of Cervantes 535–6
Jefferson, Thomas (1743–1826) 578, 580
Use of term ‘quixotic’ 580
Jerusalém, La see La conquista de Jerusalén
Jonson, Ben (1572–1637) 548–9
Epicoene (1610) 548–9
Juan de Austria, Don (1547–78) 4, 7, 40, 237, 470, 472, 539
Justa literaria 533–4
Justa poética 532–3
K
Kafka, Franz (1883–1924) 143–4
Kierkegaard, Søren (1813–55) 204–208
Fear and Trembling (1843) 205–206
Johannes de Silentio (pseudonym) 205–206
L
La Amaranta o La del Mayo (lost play) 336, 469, 474–5
La batalla naval (lost play) 336, 468–9, 472–473, 522–523
La cárcel de Sevilla (attributed) 476–477
La casa de los celos y las selvas de Ardenia (1615) 358–363, 418, 474–476, 501–2, 526
Date of Composition 474–5
La confusa (1585; lost play) 469, 475
as El laberinto de amor 475
La conquista de Jerusalén por Godofre de Bullón(1586; attributed) xxxiii, 335–336,
340, 345–348, 394, 404–407, 410, 469, 471–473, 480, 505
Allegorical characters in 346
Attribution to Cervantes 346–348, 471–472
as La Jerusalém 471
Papeles de actor 345–346, 348
La cueva de Salamanca (1615) 380, 384–387, 389, 424, 439
Poetry in 439
La elección de los alcaldes de Daganzo (1615) 379, 383–384, 389, 424, 426, 477–478
La entretenida (1615) 358–363, 366–7, 420, 422–424, 526, 637
Representation of women in 359
Subversiveness in 359–360
Versification in 420, 422–424
La española inglesa (1613) 26–28, 32–36, 46–47, 69–72, 245, 247–248, 251, 253,
325–326, 500–1, 634–635
Economics in 70
La fuerza de la sangre (1613) 245, 247, 250–251, 549–50, 634–635
La gitanilla 126, 245, 247–250, 321, 325–326, 433, 438, 549–50, 634–635
Poetry in 433, 438
La gran sultana doña Catalina de Oviedo (1615) 51–52, 72–76, 78, 347–348, 363–368,
394, 396–400, 406–407, 417, 471–472, 475
Ambiguities in 74–75
La gran turquesca (lost play) 336, 469, 474
Date of composition 474
as La gran sultana 474
La guarda cuidadosa (1615) 384, 389, 424
La ilustre fregona (1613) 245, 247, 251, 320–321, 325–328, 422–3, 433, 493–4, 549–
50
Poetry in 433
Las dos doncellas (1613) 245, 500–1, 549–50, 634–635
La señora Cornelia (1613) 245, 251 n41, 500–1, 549–50, 634–635
Las semanas del jardín (lost work) 467, 478–481
Las Sergas de Esplandián (1510) by Garci Rodríguez de Montalvo 23, 95, 492–493
La tía fingida (attributed) 239, 482–483
La única, y la bizarra Arsinda (lost play) 336, 469, 476
Lazarillo de Tormes (1554) 16, 75, 128–129, 178, 240, 328–9, 457, 493–4
Leaden Books of Granada 195–196
Ledesma, Alonso de (1552–1623) 541
as Avellaneda 541
Lemos, Pedro Fernández de Castro, Count of (1576–1622) 12–13, 16–18, 118–119,
145, 234–236, 249, 258, 447–449, 456, 533–4, 537, 542–543
Lennox, Charlotte (1730–1804) 555–6
Female Quixote, or, The Adventures of Arabella, The (1752) 555–6
León, Fray Luis de (1527–91) 436
Lepanto, Battle of (1571) xxvii–xxviii, xxx, 6–7, 21, 26–28, 32, 38–39, 52–53, 57–59,
67, 237, 470, 472–473, 516, 521–522, 539, 606–607
Lerma, Francisco Gómez de Sandoval y Rojas, Duke of (1553–1625) 537, 628
Leucippe and Clitophon by Achilles Tatius 18, 258 n4
Limpieza de sangre (blood purity) 4–5, 339, 355–356, 358–359, 364, 392–395, 398–
400, 403–405
Liñán de Riaza, Pedro (1557–1607) 541
Lobo Lasso de la Vega, Gabriel (1559–1623) 341–2, 347, 391, 470, 473–4
Tragedia de la destruyción de Constantinopla (1587) 473–4
Locke, John (1632–1704) 551
Essay Concerning Human Understanding (1690) 551
López de Úbeda, Francisco 542
La pícara Justina (1605) 542, 632
López de Zárate, Francisco (1580–1658) 283
Poema heroico de la invención de la cruz, por el emperador Constantino Magno (1648)
283
López Maldonado, Gabriel (d. 1615) 518, 541
El cancionero (1586) 541
Los baños de Argel, (1615) 7–8, 51–52, 54–55, 59–62, 73–74, 347–348, 363–368,
394, 396–397, 400, 402–404, 406–407, 420, 471–472, 539–40, 549–50
Ambiguities in 61–62
Meta-theatre in 366–7
Versification in 420
Los habladores (attributed) 376–377, 380, 388–389, 476, 478
Los mirones (attributed) 476–477
Los romances (attributed) 476
Connection to Don Quixote 476
Lost in La Mancha (2002) 546–547, 566, 612, 658–659
Los tratos de Argel (also El trato de Argel) (c.1581) xxxiii, 8–9, 40, 48, 51–56, 62–63,
259, 335–341, 346–348, 366, 394, 396, 400–402, 406–407, 410, 468–473,
475, 497, 522–523
Allegorical characters in 338
Ambiguities in 56, 339
Date of composition 336–337
Manuscript of 335–336
Papel de actor 348, 469–470
Political reading of 339
Louis XIII, King of France (1610–43) 17
Lucas, Charles (1769–1854) 556–557
Infernal Quixote: a Tale of the Day, The (1801) 556–557
Lucian of Samosata (c.125–80 AD) 269–270, 285–287, 292, 449–50, 459, 506–7
and Persiles y Sigismunda see Persiles y Sigismunda
Lynch, David (1946–) 580
Mulholland Drive (2001) 580
M
Machiavelli, Niccolò (1469–1527) 502–503
The Prince (1532) 502–503
Madden, John (1949–) 616
Shakespeare in Love (1998) 616
Magnus, Johannes (1488–1544) 284–285, 291
Magnus, Olaus (1490–1557) 284–285, 291
Historia de Gentibus Septentrionalibus (1555) 284–285
Malón de Chaide, Pedro (1530–89) 626
La conversion de la Magdalena (1588) 626
Man of La Mancha 170, 608
Film adaptation of (1972) 608–609
Manrique, Jorge (c.1440–79) 436
Margarita of Austria, Queen of Spain (1584–1611) 537
Mariana of Austria, Queen of Spain (1634–96) 200–201
Martínez Espinel, Vicente Gómez (1550–1624) 537, 539
Diversas rimas (1591) 539
Martorell, Joanot (1410–68) 493
Tirant lo Blanch (1490) 493
Massinger, Philip (1583–1640) 258, 548–50
Custom of the Country, The (1625) 258, 550–551
Fair Maid of the Inn, The (1625) 549–50
Fatal Dowry, The (1619) 549–50
Renegado, The (1624) 549–50
Virgin Martyr, The (1622) 548–9
Masuccio Salernitano (1410–75) 500–1
Novelle 500–1
Maximilian II, Holy Roman Emperor (1564–76) 474
Mayáns y Siscar, Gregorio (1699–1781) 529
Medinilla, Pedro de (d. 1621) 536
Melville, Herman (1819–91) 578–579
Moby Dick (1851) 578–579
Piazza Tales, The (1856) 578–579
Mena, Juan de (1411–56) 323–324
Laberinto de Fortuna (1444) 323–324
Mercado, Pedro de 300–1
Diálogos de philosophía natural y moral (1558) 300–1
Mesa, Cristóbal de (1559–1633) 391, 518, 533–4
Middleton, Thomas (1580–1627) 546, 548–50
Lady’s Tragedy, The (1611) 548–9
Spanish Gipsy, The (1623) 549–50
Your Five Gallants (1607) 546, 548–9
Milton, John (1608–74) 557, 642–3
Ministerio de Tiempo, El 617–618
Mira de Amuesca, Antonio (1577–1636) 456
Molina, Josefina (1936–) 610–11
Teresa de Jesús (1984) 610–11
Montaigne, Michel de (1533–92) 285–6
Montemayor, Jorge de (1520–61) 9, 16, 216, 218–220, 301–302, 493–495, 625–627
Diana, La (1559) 9, 16, 216, 218–220, 301–302, 493–495, 625–627
Mora, Jerónimo de (d. 1615) 535–6
Morales, Ambrosio de (1513–91) 509
Crónica general de España (1574) 509
Morán, Jerónimo (1817–72) 593
More, Thomas (1478–1535) xxvii, 503, 507–508
Utopia (1516) 503, 507–508
N
Navarre, Marguerite de (1492–1549) 500
Heptaméron (1588) 500
Nietzsche, Friedrich (1844–1900) 194–5
Nine Worthies / Nine Paragons (los nueve de la fama) 200–201, 471 n10
Novelas ejemplares (1613) xxxii–xxxv, 13–16, 18, 46, 199, 233–254, 258–259, 316–
317, 321, 436–438, 445, 475, 499, 507–508, 527–8, 549–551, 632–636, 638–
639
Ambiguities in 246
Anagnorisis in 250
Chronology of 245–246
Exemplarity in 246–249, 251–253
‘Mystery’ in 249–250, 253–254
Poetry in 436–438
Prologue 237, 246, 249, 445, 634
Translation into English (1640) 551
Translation into English (1644) 549–50
Translation into French (1615) 549–50
Warfare in 21
Numancia, La (c. 1583) xxxiii, 8–9, 21–26, 36, 40–42, 286, 336, 340–346, 392–393,
395, 410, 418–419, 468–473, 475, 497, 509, 522–525, 637
and Aeneid, The (c. 19 BC) by Virgil 22–23, 508–509
Allegorical characters in 341, 343–344, 637
Ambiguities in 25, 40–41, 319–320, 341–343, 395
and Araucana, La 23, 418
and Empire 40–42
and Epic poetry 22–24, 40–42
Hamartia in 342–343
Justice in warfare 343
and Las Sergas de Esplandián 23
and Persians, The by Aeschylus 41–42
and Pharsalia (AD 65) by Lucan 22–23
Political reading of 341–2
Suicide in 310, 341
Verse forms in 418–419
Warfare in 21–26
Justice in 22–23, 25
Siege warfare in 23–24
Nussbaum, Raphael (1931–93) 608–609
The Amorous Adventures of Don Quixote and Sancho Panza (1976) 608–609
O
Ocho comedias, y ocho entremeses nuevos, nunca representados (1615) xxxiii–xxxiv, 15,
242, 335–336, 340, 348, 352–373, 376–390, 392–393, 410, 427, 438, 468–9,
472, 515–516, 518–519, 522, 525, 538, 549–50, 638–639
Ocho comedias 352–373, 525
as Anti-Lope 355, 358–359, 525, 616–617
Political reading of 355–356
Unorthodox form 357–358, 372–373
Ocho entremeses 376–390, 462
Apologia in 384
Cervantes’s Innovations in 379
Characters in 380–381
Entremés before Cervantes 377–379
Language in 379–380
Resolution in 381–382
Rhetoric in 384–5, 387–390
Versification in 424–427
Prologue 335–336, 377–378, 427, 515–516, 518–519, 522–4
Poetry in 438
Ochoa, Juan de (1554–1606) 535
One Thousand and One Nights (Arabian Nights) 238
Oran, Defence of (1563) 364–365
Representation of history in 364–365
Ortega y Gasset, José (1883–1955) 629–630
Meditaciones del Quijote (1914) 629–630
Ovid 44, 360, 495, 508–509
Heroides (c. 25–16 BC) 495, 508–509
Metamorphoses (c. 8AD) 508–509
P
Pacheco, Francisco (1564–1644) 518, 535
Padilla, Fray Pedro (1540–1600?) 518, 541
Tesoro de varias poesías (1580) 541
Palmerín de Inglaterra (1543) by Francisco de Moraes (1500–72) 480
París, Inés (1963–) 615–616
Miguel y William (2007) 615–616
Patino, Basilio Martín (1930–2017) 607–608
Rinconete y Cortadillo (unfinished film) 607–608
Pedro de Urdemalas (1615) 60, 75, 361, 368–373, 393–394, 412–414, 419–422, 427,
525–527, 539–40, 577, 637–8
Petrarchan tropes in 421–423
as Pseudo-picaresque 368, 370
Versification in 412–414, 419–422, 427
Pellicer y Pilares, Juan Antonio (1739–1806) 591–592
Persiles y Sigismunda, Los trabajos de (1617) xxix, xxxii–xxxv, 7, 18, 42, 47–48, 51–52,
54–55, 76–78, 223, 236–238, 240, 242, 244–245, 244 n29, 253–254, 257–292,
316–317, 324–326, 433, 439, 475, 491–492, 496, 499, 507–508, 527–8, 531,
538, 541, 547–548, 550, 575–576, 631–632
and the Aeneid 273, 276–277
Ambiguity in 76
Anacharsis in 269 n59
Genre in 258
False captives in 76–78
Interpolated ‘novels’ in 240
Lucian of Samosata 264–293
Faux naïf in 269–270, 269 n59, 282
and the Odyssey 273, 276–277
Plot Overview of 261–264
Poetry in 433, 439
Reception of 258
Rhetoric in 389
Translation into English (1619) 550
Petrarch, Francesco (1304–74) 228, 494, 498–9, 502, 539, 626
Il canzoniere 499
Pharsalia (AD 65) by Lucan 22–23, 509
Philip II, King of Spain (1556–98) xxviii, xxxv, 5–6, 8–9, 11, 14, 39–46, 48, 62–63,
195–196, 286, 339, 344–5, 470, 472, 474, 480–81, 493, 515, 518, 542, 628,
639
as Aeneas 42–44
Annexation of Portugal (1580) 344, 470
as Augustus 39
as Bernardo del Carpio 39
as Cid 39
as Constantine 39
as King David 42
as Philip I, King of Portugal (1580–98) xxviii, 8, 40–41
Philip III, King of Spain (1598–1621) xxxv, 11–12, 45–46, 138, 195–196, 233, 266–
7, 542, 625–626
Pax Hispanica 266–7
Philip IV, King of Spain (1621–65) 195–196, 200–201
Philosophical Quixote, or Memoirs of Mr David Wilkins (1782) by Anonymous 556–557
Piamonte, Nicolao de 323–324
Historia del emperador Carlo Magno, y de los doze pares de Francia (1521) 323–324
Pilon, Frederick (1750–88) 553
Barataria; or, Sancho Turn’d Governor (1785) 553
Pinciano, El, Alonso López (1547–1627) 178, 241, 259–60, 283, 379–380, 409, 504–
5
Philosophía antigua poética (1596) 241, 379–380, 409, 504–5
Pius V, Pope (1566–72) 52
Plato 193–195, 300–1, 504–5, 523–4
Republic 192, 504–5
Propertius (d. 15 BC) 228
Purbeck, Jane and Elizabeth 556–557
History of Sir George Warrington, or the Political Quixote, The (1797) 556–557
William Thornborough, or the Benevolent Quixote (1791) 556–557
Q
Quevedo, Francisco de (1580–1645) 424, 461, 493–4, 497, 537, 539
El Buscón (1604) 461, 493–4
Quiñones de Benavente, Luis (1581–1651) 424
R
Rabelais, François (1494?–1553) 154
Raphael Sanzio (1483–1520) 498
Rinconete y Cortadillo (1613) 10, 13–14, 237, 239, 243–247, 244 n29, 327–328, 482,
493–4, 558
Rioja, Francisco de (1583–1659) 535–6
Ríos, Nicolás de los (d. 1610) 539–40
Ríos, Vicente de los (1736–79) 589–591
Rodrigo, King of the Visigoths (688–711) 286
Rodríguez de Ardila, Pedro (d. 1621) 452–3
Baco y sus bodas en España 452–3
Rodríguez Zapatero, José Luis (1960–) 614–5
Rojas Zorrilla, Francisco de (1607–48) 344
Romancero general (1600) 461
Ronsard Pierre de (1524–85) 499
Rowley, William (1586–1626) 548–9
Witch of Edmonton, The (1623) 548–9
Rueda, Lope de (c. 1510–65) xxxiii, 60, 352, 366–7, 377–378, 393, 424, 497, 515–
516, 539–40
Rufo, Juan (1547–1620) 535
La Austríada (1584) 539
Las seiscientas apotegmas (1596) 535
Rushdie, Salman (1947–) 559
Moors Last Sigh, The (1995) 559
S
Saavedra, Isabel de (1584–1652) 8–9, 11–13
Sack of Cádiz (1596) 42–3, 46, 70–71, 639
Sack of Rome (1527) 40–41, 498
Salas de Barbadillo, Alonso Jerónimo de (1580–1635) 537, 549–50
El sagaz Estacio (1620) 549–50
Salazar, Catalina de (1565–1626) xxviii, 8–9, 257
Saldaña, Don Diego Gómez de Sandoval y Rojas, Conde de 532, 538
Salinas, Don Diego de Silva y Mendoza, Count of (1564–1630) 538
Sandoval, Bernardo de, Archbishop of Toledo (1546–1618) 518
Sannazaro, Jacopo (1458–1530) 494, 625–626
Arcadia (1504) 494, 625–626
San Pedro, Diego de (1437–98) 495–496
Arnalte y Lucenda (1491) 495
La cárcel de amor (1492) 495–496
Santiago (St James) 195–196, 480–81
as Matamoros 480–81
Sartre, Jean-Paul (1905–80) 203–205
Scott, Sir Walter (1771–1832) 555, 557
Waverley (1814) 557
Sebastian I, King of Portugal (1557–78) 470
Second Spanish Republic (1931–39) 602
Selim II, Ottoman Sultan (1566–74) 473–4
Seneca (d. 65AD) 449–50, 523–4
Serra, Albert (1975–) 615–616
Honor de cavallería (2006) 615–616
Sessa, Duke of (1582–1642) 532
Letter from Lope de Vega (1612) 532
Shakespeare, William (1564–1616) xxix, 118, 154, 238, 500, 548–9, 552, 564, 566–
567, 616–617, 625
As You Like It 208
History of Cardenio, The (1613) with Fletcher 118, 548–9, 552, 564–567
Double Falsehood by Theobold as 552, 564–566
Midsummer Night’s Dream 378
Othello 616
Romeo and Juliet (1595) 500
Sharman, Vincent (1906–2006) 606
Cervantes (1967) 606–607
Shelley, Mary Wollstonecraft (1797–1851) 557–558
Frankenstein (1818) 558
Lives of the Most Eminent Literary and Scientific Men of Italy, Spain, and Portugal
(1837) 557–558
Siege of Orán and Mers-el-Kebir (1563) 62–64
Silva y Mendoza, Francisco de 537–8
Smollett, Tobias (1721–71) 554–556, 578
Adventures of Sir Launcelot Greaves (1760) 555–6
Expedition of Humphry Clinker, The (1771) 554–555
Peregrine Pickle (1751) 554–555
Roderick Random (1748) 554–555
Translation of Don Quixote (1755) 554–555, 578
Southerne, Thomas (1660–1746) 551
Disappointment, The (1684) 551
Spanish American War (1898) 205, 600–601
Spanish Armada (1588) 9, 42, 516
Spanish Civil War (1936–9) 602
Spenser, Edmund (1552–99) 225, 557
Amoretti and Epithalamion (1595) 225
Faerie Queen, The (1590) 225
Rota Virgilii in 225
Shepherds Calendar, The (1579) 225
Sterne, Laurence (1713–68) 554–555
Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman, The (1759–67) 554
Stowe, Harriet Beecher (1811–96) 578
Uncle Tom’s Cabin (1852) 578
Straparola, Giovanni Francesco (c.1485–1558) 238
Le piacevole notti (1550–3) 238
Suárez de Figueroa, Cristóbal (1571–1644) 533–4, 541
as Avellaneda 541
El pasajero (1617) 541
La constante Amarilis (1609) 541
Plaza universal de todas ciencias y artes (1615) 541
Suicide 309–310
Suleiman the Magnificent, Ottoman Sultan (1527–66) 473
Swift, Jonathan (1667–45) 552
Battle of the Books, The (1704) 552
T
Tasso, Torquato (1544–95) 259–60, 282–283, 345–346, 480, 505–6, 642–3
Discourses on the Heroic Poem (1594) 505
Gerusalemme liberata (1581) 283, 345–346, 505
Teresa de Jesús, St (1515–82) 533
Beatification of 533
Thackeray, William (1811–63) 555
Theobold, Lewis (1688–1744) 552, 564
Double Falsehood, or The Distressed Lovers (1727) 552, 564–566
as History of Cardenio, The by Fletcher and Shakespeare 552, 564–566
Timoneda, Juan de (1520?–83) 238, 377
El Patrañuelo (1567) 238
Tirso de Molina (1579–1648) 409–410
Topografía e historia natural de Argel (1612) by Antonio de Sosa 7–8, 55, 467
Torres Naharro, Bartolomé de (1485–1530) 228, 638
Translatio imperii 45
Twain, Mark (1835–1910) 579
Huckleberry Finn (1884) 578–579
U
Unamuno, Miguel de (1864–1936) 142–3, 205–208, 629
En torno al casticismo (1895) 629
Tragic Sense of Life (1912) 207–208
Vida de don Quijote y Sancho (1914) 90, 205, 207, 629
Ungría, Alfonso (1942–) 609–611
Cervantes (1981) 609–611
V
Valdivieso, José de (1565–1638) 269
Vanegas, Daniel 579
Adventures of Don Chipote, The (1928) 579
Vargas Manrique, don Luis (1566–93) 218–219
Vázquez, Mateo (1542?–91) 639
Vega Carpio, Félix Lope de (1562–1635) xxviii, xxxiii–xxxiv, 11–16, 42, 61, 157–
158, 178, 241–242, 260–61, 267, 269–270, 278, 335, 348, 353–355, 357–359,
366–7, 391–2, 409–410, 420, 422–3, 437–438, 456–457, 468–9, 497, 500,
514–529, 532, 535–537, 636–637
Arauco domado (1625) 395–396
Arte nuevo de escribir comedias en este tiempo (1609) 409–410, 420, 438, 456, 497,
519–20, 525–6
Capa y espada formula 358–359, 526
and Cervantes 514–529
Letter about Cervantes (1604) 519–20
Rupture with 518–519
Targeted by Cervantes 520–521
Childhood 515
El cerco de Santa Fe (1604) 395–396
El cordobés valeroso (1604) 395–396
El hidalgo bencerraje (1605) 395–396
El hijo de Reduán (1603–4) 395–396
El Isidro (1599) 521
El nuevo mundo descubierto por Cristóbal Colón (1603) 395–396
El peregrino en su patria (1604) 267, 269–270, 521
El remedio en la desdicha (1604) 395–396
El sol parado (1622) 395–396
Exile from Madrid (1588–95) 517
on Galatea, La by Cervantes 517–518
La Arcadia (1598) 517, 521
La dama boba (1613) 522
La divina vencedora (1624) 395–396
La Dorotea (1632) 522
La Dragontea (1602) 518
Cervantes’s sonnet in 518
La viuda valenciana (1620) 500, 517
Letter to the Duke of Sessa (1612) 532
Novelas a Marcia Leonarda(1621) 529
Rimas (1604) 521–522
Trial of (1588) 437
Vega, Garcilaso de (1501–36) 228, 267, 272, 287–288, 342, 422–3, 426, 436, 496–7,
499, 539, 626
Églogas 288–289, 291, 496–7
Velázquez, Diego (1599–1660) 200–201, 204, 208–9, 251–252
Apolo en la Fragua de Vulcano (Apollo in the Forge of Vulcan; 1629–30) 251–252
Las Meninas (1656) 200–201, 208–9
Los borrachos (The Drunkards; 1626–28) 251–252
Vélez de Guevara, Luis (1579–1644) 535, 537
Verisimilitude 18, 78, 105–6, 112, 138–9, 165, 177, 243 n21, 250–251, 259, 284,
290, 315–6, 318, 483, 504–507, 524, 555, 626–627
Versification in Drama xxxiv, 409–427
Italianate verse forms 414–418
Viaje del Parnaso (1614) xxviii, xxxv–xxxvi, 18, 28, 91, 257, 267, 336, 341, 418,
433–434, 436–437, 439, 445–461, 468–9, 475–476, 480, 497, 502, 531, 533–
542, 638–639
Influences for 449–453
Plot summary of 446–449
Reception of 445–6
Vicente, Gil (1465–1536) 452–3
Nao de amores (1527) 452–3
Villegas, Esteban Manuel de (1589–1669) 542
Eróticas o amatorias (1618) 542
Virgil (70–19 BC) 22–23, 42, 44, 47–48, 215–230, 265, 273, 276–277, 282, 284,
451, 498–9, 505–507, 509
Aeneid, The (c. 19 BC) 22–23, 42, 44, 47–48, 216, 227–228, 273, 276–277, 505–
507, 509
Bucolics 493–4
Ecologues 224, 226–227
Georgics 216, 224–227, 282, 284
Rota Virgilii in Galatea, La see Galatea, La
Rota Virgilii in Spenser, see Spenser, Edmund
Virués, Cristóbal de (1550–1609) 341–2, 347, 391, 418, 447, 497, 516, 523–4, 539–
40
Vives, Juan Luis (1493–1540) xxvii, 301–302, 502–503
Education of a Christian Woman (1523) 503
W
Waddington, Andrucha (1970–) 616–617
Lope (2010) 616–617
Washington, George (1732–99) 578
Webster, John (1580–1632) 549–50
Fair Maid of the Inn, The (1625) 549–50
Welles, Orson (1915–85) 612–613
Incomplete film of Don Quixote 612–613
Wilkins, George (1576–1618) 546, 548–9
Miseries of Inforst Marriage, The (1607) 546, 548–9
Winstanley, William (1628–98) 552
Essex Champion: or, The Famous Hisotry of Sir Billy of Billerecay and his Squire
Ricardo (1690) 552
Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1889–1951) 203
Wyatt, Thomas (1503–42) 499
X
Xenophon 208–9
