An_Agenda_for_Sustainable_Development_Research_Springer_2024.pdf

123
World Sustainability Series
Walter Leal Filho
Amanda Lange Salvia
Claudio Ruy Portela de Vasconcelos   Editors
An Agenda 
for Sustainable 
Development 
Research
World Sustainability Series
Series Editor
Walter Leal Filho, European School of Sustainability Science
and Research, Research and Transfer Centre “Sustainable Development
and Climate Change Management”, Hamburg University of Applied Sciences,
Hamburg, Germany
Due to its scope and nature, sustainable development is a matter which is very
interdisciplinary, and draws from knowledge and inputs from the social sciences
and environmental sciences on the one hand, but also from physical sciences and
arts on the other. As such, there is a perceived need to foster integrative approaches,
whereby the combination of inputs from various ﬁelds may contribute to a better
understanding of what sustainability is, and means to people. But despite the need
for and the relevance of integrative approaches towards sustainable development,
there is a paucity of literature which address matters related to sustainability in an
integrated way.
Notes on the quality assurance and peer review of this publication
Prior to publication, the works published in this book are initially assessed and
reviewed by an in-house editor. If suitable for publication, manuscripts are sent for
further review, which includes a combined effort by the editorial board and appointed
subject experts, who provide independent peer-review. The feedback obtained in this
way was communicated to authors, and with manuscripts checked upon return before
ﬁnally accepted. The peer-reviewed nature of the books in the “World Sustainability
Series” means that contributions to them have, over many years, been ofﬁcially
accepted for tenure and promotion purposes.
Walter Leal Filho · Amanda Lange Salvia ·
Claudio Ruy Portela de Vasconcelos
Editors
An Agenda for Sustainable
Development Research
Editors
Walter Leal Filho
European School of Sustainability Science
and Research
Hamburg University of Applied Sciences
Hamburg, Germany
Claudio Ruy Portela de Vasconcelos
Production Engineering Department
Federal University of Paraíba—UFPB
Joao Pessoa, Paraíba, Brazil
Amanda Lange Salvia
European School of Sustainability Science
and Research
Hamburg University of Applied Sciences
Hamburg, Germany
ISSN 2199-7373
ISSN 2199-7381 (electronic)
World Sustainability Series
ISBN 978-3-031-65908-9
ISBN 978-3-031-65909-6 (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2024
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether
the whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse
of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland
If disposing of this product, please recycle the paper.
Preface
Sustainable development encompasses a range of complex issues including poverty,
inequality, climate change, environmental degradation, peace, and justice. A compre-
hensive research agenda helps in understanding these interconnections and in devel-
oping holistic solutions. This is because research provides the necessary evidence
to inform policy decisions. Reliable data and rigorous analysis help policymakers
create effective, efﬁcient, and equitable sustainability policies that are more likely to
succeed.
The creation of an agenda for sustainable development research involves estab-
lishing a set of priorities and a roadmap that can guide scholarly and practical efforts
towards sustainability goals.
It may encourage collaboration across disciplines to address complex sustain-
ability issues that span social, economic, and environmental domains. It may also
support the development of robust methodologies for conducting research, including
quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods approaches. But despite the importance
of and the need for an agenda for sustainable development research, many efforts
are isolated and thematically disconnected. Also, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd information on
how sustainability research is being undertaken, and on the wide range of methods
being used.
Against this backdrop and in order to facilitate a broad discussion on the contribu-
tion of sustainable development research, the book An Agenda for Sustainable Devel-
opment Research has been prepared, gathering inputs from universities and research
organisations working on matters related to sustainable development research in a
variety of contexts. It also provides a platform for the dissemination of informa-
tion on the latest initiatives, paving the way for technology transfer and networking.
Furthermore, the book intends to provide a fertile basis upon which universities,
research centres and practitioners, may cooperate more closely in this key area.
Lastbutnotleast,afurtheraimofthebookistopresentmethodologicalapproaches
and experiences deriving from case studies and projects, which aim to show how
sustainability research may be implemented across a range of disciplines.
v
vi
Preface
This book is structured in two parts.
Part One—Sustainable Development from theory to practice
Part Two—Research and Educational Opportunities
Part One—Sustainable Development from Theory to Practice: this section delves into
the theoretical and practical application of sustainable development principles. Chap-
ters within this part examine various aspects of sustainable development, exploring
concepts such as circular economy, energy sustainability and climate action. Through
case studies and theoretical frameworks, these chapters highlight the importance of
integrating sustainability into decision-making processes and fostering sustainable
practices across different sectors and regions.
Part Two—Research and Educational Opportunities: in this section, chapters
explore the diverse opportunities for research, teaching and outreach in the ﬁeld of
sustainable development. Through collaborative partnerships and interdisciplinary
approaches, this part reinforces the role of research and learning opportunities in
different areas and in all educational levels.
We thank all authors for sharing their knowledge and their experience by means
of their chapters, and those colleagues who have contributed to it by assisting with
the reviews. Thanks to its scope and interdisciplinarity, this book makes an excellent
reading for everyone interested in sustainability research.
Hamburg, Germany
Hamburg, Germany
Joao Pessoa, Brazil
Walter Leal Filho
Amanda Lange Salvia
Claudio Ruy Portela de Vasconcelos
Contents
Sustainable Development from Theory to Practice
Empowering Citizens for Energy Communities in the European
Union . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Alba Medina-Bousoño and Javier Sierra
Edible Weeds in Agricultural Landscapes as a Research Emphasis
for Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
Bruno Borsari and Malcolm F. Vidrine
Transitioning to a Sustainable Smart Agriculture Using Deep
Machine Learning Techniques: The Case of a Greek Project . . . . . . . . . . .
39
Aristea Kounani, Alkiviadis Tsimpiris, and Dimitrios Varsamis
Sustainable Infrastructure and Climate Change: Natural Disaster
Risk Insurance Solutions for Belt and Road Countries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
Jintao Yang, Kirill Savrassov, and Nikolai Gorbatchev
Ecotourism: The Concept and the Practice of Sustainability
Within Tourism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
Cláudia Toriz Ramos and Allison Margaret Byrne
Rewilding the Cajun Prairie: Efforts in Land Rehabilitation
Ensure a Sustainable Future in Southwestern Louisiana
and Beyond . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
M. F. Vidrine, B. Borsari, M. Pastorek, and C. M. Allen
Strategies for the Sustainability of Cane Agroindustry
and Development of Green Agribusiness for Well-Being . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
Noé Aguilar-Rivera
Greening Main Street USA: Adapting Sustainability Indicators
to Rural Areas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
131
A’dayr Shewmaker, Anne E. Egelston, and Karl Aho
vii
viii
Contents
The Impact of Monetary Policy on Climate Change: A Systematic
Literature Review and Future Research Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . .
145
Nadeen Omar and Dina Yousri
The Role of Islamic Values on Sustainable Lifestyles: Does Living
Area Matter? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
163
Mohamad Saifudin Mohamad Saleh, Ali Mehellou, and Bahiyah Omar
Where’s Wally? The Search for Social Sustainability
in the Maritime Industry and Recommendations for Future
Research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
183
Michael Ekow Manuel and Alina Prylipko
Incorporating Existential Risks into Sustainable Development
Research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
201
Bertrand G. Guillaume
Circular Economy Adoption in Construction: A Pathway
to Sustainable Development and UN SDG 11 Achievement . . . . . . . . . . . .
213
Rayra Brandão and Livia Verissimo
The Use of Blockchain in Public Administration: A Transformative
Tool for a More Sustainable Future . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
231
María Cendán Castillo and Isabel Novo Corti
The Mediating Effect of Perceived Persuasiveness
on the Relationship Between Gamiﬁed Reward in Ant
Forest and User’s Sustainable Behaviour in China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
247
Miao Huang, Mohamad Saifudin Mohamad Saleh,
Izzal Asnira Zolkepli, and Lei Wang
The Importance of Being Returned from Bottled Water to Tap
Water in Turkey in Terms of Sustainable Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
265
Canan Karakaş Ulusoy
Demonstrating Energy Transitions in Micro Industries:
Sustainability of Energy Justice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
277
Mini Govindan, Rashmi Murali, Abhinish Boora,
and Amit Kumar Thakur
Priority Issues for Future Cities: Opportunities and Challenges
for Sustainable Development Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
293
Jerry Kolo
An Agenda for Sustainable Development: The Role of Strategic
Impact Assessment in Promoting Namibia’s Transition to a Green
Economy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
307
Philip Mensah, Eric Yankson, and Derrick Frimpong Buabeng
Contents
ix
The Role of Urban Design in Achieving the UN SDGs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
327
Şebnem Hoşkara and Özge Selen Koç
Fostering Sustainability Through Research and Education? The
Transformative Role of Switzerland’s Centre for Development
and Environment (CDE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
357
Christoph Bader, Sabin Bieri, Lilian Trechsel, and Anu Lannen
The Role of the Ofﬁce for the Environment at the University
of a Coruña in Promoting Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
373
Verónica Torrijos, Martina Dono, Domingo Calvo-Dopico,
Amparo Casares-Gallego, and Manuel Soto
Research and Educational Opportunities
Powering Sustainable Development: The Critical Role of Energy
Research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
403
Aliaksandr Novikau
Sustainable Research Agenda of the International Journal
Discourse and Communication for Sustainable Education: Current
Developments and Future Perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
421
Dzintra Iliško and Berise Heasly
A Science Diplomacy Agenda for Sustainable Development
Research
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
435
Julia M. Puaschunder
A Systematic Review of Curriculum and Its Connections
with Education for Sustainable Development in the Context
of Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
455
Madiha Khadim
Integrating the Agenda for Sustainable Development
into Entrepreneurship Education: A Combination of Expectation
and Practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
473
Ratna Lindawati Lubis
Integration of the Triple Helix Model in Sustainability Research.
ISOSCAN as Case Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
503
Jose Manuel Diaz-Sarachaga
Scientiﬁc Research as a Driver of the Sustainable Development
Agenda: A 6-year Study of Dissertations in a Graduate Program
in Administration at a Brazilian Higher Education Institution . . . . . . . . .
521
Franciele Pereira Zazycki,
João Gabriel Moreira, Henrique Lapa Lunardi,
Ana Regina de Aguiar Dutra, Robert Samuel Birch,
and José Baltazar Salgueirinho Osório de Andrade Guerra
x
Contents
Co-Creation and Participatory Research: Climate Assemblies
in Schools as a Means to Sustainability Transitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
541
Anna Boqué-Ciurana, Gisela Cebrián, and Jon Xavier Olano
Role of Higher Education Institutions in Promoting Sustainable
Development Goals Through Research, Teaching and Outreach . . . . . . . .
557
Aline Bento Ambrosio Avelar and María Luisa Pajuelo-Moreno
Supporting Research and Education Stakeholders in Meeting
the Sustainable Development Goals Through the HESI SDG
Publishers Compact Fellows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
579
Derek M. Lough, Rebecca Kirk, Victoria Gardner, Nikita Lad,
and Gerald Beasley
Sustainable Development Agenda 2030 Goals and Early Childhood
Education—A Case Study of Project-Based Learning in Higher
Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
603
Niina Väänänen, Hanna Kettunen, Anne Posti, and Virpi Turunen
Promoting Renewable Energy Research in Brazilian Higher
Education Institutions: A Vision Aligned with Sustainable
Development Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
621
Luana de Aguiar Vieira, Henrique de Souza Medeiros,
Ana Regina de Aguiar Dutra, Anelise Leal Vieira Cubas,
Robert Birch, and José Baltazar Salgueirinho Osório de Andrade Guerra
An Agenda for Research on Sustainability Reporting: Europe
and Beyond . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
635
Josef Baumüller, Michaela-Maria Schaffhauser-Linzatti,
and Karina Sopp
Making Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) More
Inclusive and Engaging Through Universal Design for Learning
(UDL): A Case Study at the Westminster Business School . . . . . . . . . . . . .
651
Gustavo R. Espinoza-Ramos
Towards a Responsive Science Education for Sustainable
Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
671
Ian Phil Canlas
Distance Learning and Digitization as a Means to Challenge
Students’ Thinking Toward Sustainability Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
691
Luis Velazquez, Nora Munguia, Alma Gabriela Pulgarin-Herrera,
Jesus Salvador Gutierrez-Ruelas, and Claudia Jayne Falcon-Perez
Online Courses and Educational Networking: Ontological
Approach to Integration of SD-Linked Outcomes
into Advanced-Learning Courses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
709
Jintao Yang, Kirill Savrassov, Nikolai Gorbatchev, and Tatsiana Tkalich
Contents
xi
Contributions of Academic Libraries, Librarians, and Information
Science to Education for Sustainable Development Research
and Implementation: A Canadian Undergraduate Example . . . . . . . . . . .
729
Martina King
Towards an Agenda for Sustainable Development Research . . . . . . . . . . .
741
Walter Leal Filho
Sustainable Development from Theory
to Practice
Empowering Citizens for Energy
Communities in the European Union
Alba Medina-Bousoño and Javier Sierra
Abstract In the face of the pressing global environmental and social challenges,
it’s imperative to chart pathways towards sustainable development. The European
Union faces signiﬁcant environmental challenges, and energy community solutions
have emerged as a promising avenue to address these problems and foster sustainable
energy transition. Acknowledging the need of addressing global concerns locally,
the transition to decentralized energy systems emerges as a critical step forward.
However, ensuring a prosperous and fair energy transition relies not solely on tech-
nological progress but also on fostering participatory decision-making processes.
This study explores the concept of energy communities as mechanisms for promoting
citizenengagementinsustainabilitypolicybyexaminingtheirlegalandpolicyframe-
works, different models, motivations, and barriers to citizen participation. A compre-
hensive review of the existing literature has also identiﬁed the positive impacts of
energy communities. In addition, the crucial factors that enable citizen empower-
ment are explored, including interaction patterns, incentives for participation, and
potential hurdles. The conclusions shed light on the importance of fostering citizen
participation in sustainable energy transitions as models that shape effective policy
actions to enhance energy transitions and promote more sustainable societies.
Keywords Energy · Transition · Citizen · Community · Engagement ·
Participation · Sustainability · Europe
1
Introduction
Amidst today’s urgent global environmental and social crisis, it’s crucial to
explore pathways towards sustainable development. As regards energy transitions,
these strategies should empower individuals and communities, prioritizing sustain-
able energy initiatives. As decentralized production technologies advance, energy
communities have become a topic of increased interest (Otamendi-Irizar et al. 2022).
A. Medina-Bousoño · J. Sierra (B)
University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain
e-mail: jsierra@usal.es
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_1
3
4
A. Medina-Bousoño and J. Sierra
Yet, achieving a successful and equitable energy transition hinges not only on tech-
nological advancements but also on inclusive decision-making processes (Abada
et al. 2020). This necessitates a blend of rigorous analysis, expertise in engineering
and spatial planning, and insights from social sciences. Recognizing the necessity to
tackle global issues at the local level, the shift towards decentralized energy systems,
stands as a pivotal step forward for enhancing local strategies for sustainability
(Hoicka et al. 2021).
The goal of energy transitions is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and mitigate
climate change. Furthermore, they are designed to end the dependence on imported
fossil fuels that creates a high vulnerability in a country’s energy supply. Transi-
tioning to local energy sources can increase energy autonomy. Energy communities
have emerged as an alternative to centralized energy management structures, and
are perceived as a promising area to enhance economic, social, and environmental
sustainability in the European Union (EU) (2023). The concept is diverse and is
frequently adapted to local contexts and dynamics. Therefore, there seems to be a
gap in the literature as regards how these structures are deﬁned in different settings,
and how these initiatives can contribute to promote more sustainable societies at the
local level.
Energy communities support a more democratic and participatory energy system,
rather than relying solely on large, centrally managed energy networks. The promo-
tion of citizen engagement in energy decision-making can increase public accep-
tance of renewable energy sources, making it possible to foster the incorporation of
renewable sources into the energy system. Finally, research on energy communities
promotes efﬁciency and creativity by investigating new business models, tools for
managing energy, and governance strategies. In short, the transition to local energy
sources has the potential be a strategic, and necessary, way to build a sustainable and
resilient future.
This chapter provides a comprehensive overview of the literature on empowering
citizens for energy communities, speciﬁcally focusing on energy communities in the
EU. The study examines the concept of energy communities in the EU and their role
in fostering citizen participation in sustainable energy initiatives. The results present
a wide variety of different models of interaction, as well as their frequent ineffective-
ness in terms of communicating between different parts of local and national govern-
ments, providing useful information to better understand the problems inherent in
interactions between the different actors in the energy transition.
The chapter is structured as follows. After describing the research background,
the methodology used in the study is presented, followed by an analysis of the results
and, ﬁnally, the primary conclusions.
Empowering Citizens for Energy Communities in the European Union
5
2
Background
Climate change poses a signiﬁcant challenge due to its potential economic, social,
and environmental impact. For that reason, the EU has intensiﬁed efforts in recent
years to accelerate the transition to a low-carbon, sustainable economy, reinforcing
its ﬁrm commitment to climate change mitigation and adaptation. In this context,
the European Green Deal has established the target of reducing emissions by 55%
by 2023 and achieving climate neutrality (European Commission 2019). Consonant
with this, the EU Climate Law commits the Union to implement the 2050 target
within EU legislation, and the Fit for 55 package of proposals orients legislation
towards the 2030 greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reduction targets and the 2050
vision (European Commission 2020).
Global energy consumption continues to be highly dependent on fossil fuels.
Althoughgasconsumption—consideredacleanertransitionalenergy—hasincreased
in recent years, the European economy is overly dependent on Russia for natural gas.
Therefore, the energy crisis, fueled by the Russian invasion of Ukraine, has thrown
commercial energy markets into unprecedented turmoil, with households coming
under increasing pressure from exorbitant primary commodity prices. In response,
the European Union swiftly launched the REPowerEU plan, which implemented
ﬁscal and energy measures in all the EU countries to soften the adverse effects of the
situation on their economies (European Commission 2022).
Recently, there has been a growing recognition that traditional models of repre-
sentative democracy are not sufﬁcient to address the complex and diverse challenges
facing modern societies (Dacombe and Parvin 2021). As a result, new forms of demo-
cratic participation and engagement have emerged to increase citizen involvement in
decision-making processes. The aim of these democratic innovations is to empower
citizens and give them a greater say in the decisions that affect their lives, while
also promoting transparency, accountability, and public trust in government (OECD
2020). The EU supports a bottom-up approach in which citizens have a real role in
democracy and advocates for an energy transition that takes their needs into account.
A sustainable low-carbon future will not be possible without the involvement of the
citizens who produce and consume energy locally. Therefore, citizen engagement in
the process of achieving climate neutrality and energy transition is key. Over the past
few years, there has been a growing interest among researchers and policy makers
in understanding the role of this engagement and participation by citizens in energy
transitions. Particularly in Europe, this increased attention has been reﬂected by the
creation of more than 10,000 initiatives and over 22,000 projects between 2000 and
2020 focusing on energy transition (Schwanitz et al. 2023).
6
A. Medina-Bousoño and J. Sierra
3
Methodology
Following the latest developments in bibliographic research, a systematic literature
review was conducted to provide a precise analysis of the role of citizen participation
and engagement in energy transition (Donthu et al. 2021; Sweileh 2020). The current
study is based on Scopus, an online database that contains over 25,000 journals from
all ﬁelds of study. Scopus is widely used in bibliometric studies because it provides
an accurate and comprehensive overview of the world’s research output in different
ﬁelds including the social sciences.
The search string “TITLE-ABS-KEY (energy AND transition AND citizen AND
(participation OR engagement))” was used to identify articles relevant to the study
published on or before March 27 2023. Since the approach used in this study is based
on the implementation process of citizen-centered projects, the emphasis was placed
on identifying the leading stakeholders, different types of project models, motivation
for developing these initiatives and main obstacles and barriers encountered.
The search string identiﬁed 270 publications, the majority research articles (72%),
followed by book chapters (10%), and conference papers (9%). Although the ﬁrst
article identiﬁed in the search was from 1975, the publications showed a pronounced
annual increase beginning in 2016 (n = 251). 2022 was the year with the most
publications (n = 68), demonstrating the growing recognition of the importance of
this subject (Fig. 1).
Theleadingjournals interms of number of articles writtenintheﬁeldarepresented
in Table 1. Energy Research and Social Science published a total of 28 articles. This
is closely followed by Energies, with 24 articles, and Sustainability, with 18 articles.
These journals are renowned for their focus on research and analysis in the ﬁeld of
Fig. 1 Publications per year. Source Scopus
Empowering Citizens for Energy Communities in the European Union
7
Table 1 Top 10 journals
Journal
Publishing house
No. of publications
Energy Research and Social Science
Elsevier
28
Energies
MDPI
24
Sustainability
MDPI
18
Energy Policy
Elsevier
14
Journal of Cleaner Production
Elsevier
8
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews
Elsevier
6
Energy Sustainability and Society
Springer Nature
4
Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions
Elsevier
3
Frontiers in Energy Research
Frontiers
3
Journal of Environmental Policy and Planning
Taylor & Francis
3
Source Scopus
energy, offering a wide range of knowledge and perspectives for readers interested
in this area.
Several criteria were then used to check the 270 publications and select the key
articles that were reviewed in detail. Of the 270 papers, only 152 were open access.
Giventhatthesigniﬁcanceofthisstudyisbasedontheroleofcitizensasactiveagents,
the decision to focus on open access only was made to ensure that only publications
which are available for anyone to read, were used. Also, all the selected articles were
originally written in English. In addition to this, the selection was then restricted
to published scientiﬁc articles. Furthermore, only works written from countries in
the European Union were chosen, and they had to contain the word “local” in their
title, abstract, or keywords, ensuring that the study focused on the local level in
the European Union. Using these criteria, 37 articles were selected. This process is
reﬂected in Fig. 2.
4
Results
4.1
Types of Actors
Regarding the stakeholders, there are three main actors involved in energy transi-
tion: governmental actors (municipality and/or other levels of government); private
actors; and civil society. In this context, citizen participation can help stimulate
niche innovation and experimentation, challenge the dominant regime, and create
new opportunities for more sustainable energy systems (Boeri et al. 2017). Citizens
are, in this case, the main leading actors in these types of initiatives. Most of the
literature deﬁnes these leading actors as energy citizens, meaning that the public is
conceived as an active stakeholder in energy transition, and are actively involved in
8
A. Medina-Bousoño and J. Sierra
Fig. 2 Process for selection
of publications
participation (Beauchampet and Walsh 2021). However, this activity can take many
forms, from homeowners choosing renewable energy solutions or households using
electric vehicles, to participating in, for instance, climate change demonstrations.
Considering this, different subtypes of citizens have also been identiﬁed in the
literature. The captive consumer is distanced from the sources of renewable energy
generation and consumes green energy passively; the energy producer owns and oper-
ates their own green energy generation technologies (Kloppenburg et al. 2019); the
prosumer consumes energy, produces energy and may provide ﬂexibility (Ryszawska
et al. 2021; Leal Filho et al. 2024); and the citipreneur ﬁlls an in-between position,
possessing the pioneering skills that enable local entrepreneurs to forge technology-
enabled, co-creative strategies to address societal issues and thus generate public
value (Tomor 2019).
In energy transition research, both democratic energy and community energy
have emerged as the central axes from which different forms of citizen initia-
tives develop. Energy communities are groups of people or organizations that work
together to produce, distribute, and consume energy in a more sustainable, equitable
and community-centered way than traditional energy systems. They collaborate in
the creation of initiatives, whether formal or informal, aiming to reduce their depen-
dence on fossil fuels and promoting renewable energy sources (Schmid et al. 2020).
Empowering Citizens for Energy Communities in the European Union
9
Energy democracy, on the other hand, is a broader concept that encompasses not only
energy production and consumption, but also the governance and decision-making
processes that shape energy policies and systems. Energy democracy stresses the
importance of democratic participation, community control and social justice in the
design and management of energy systems. It advocates the decentralization of power
in the energy sector and the empowerment of communities to shape their own energy
futures. In short, energy communities focus on energy production and consumption,
while energy democracy focuses on the broader political and social dimensions of
energy systems. However, the two concepts are closely related and often overlap in
practice (Szulecki 2018).
These two concepts have produced different forms of initiatives. Local renewable
energy cooperatives (LRECs) mobilize the public by serving as a link between the
government and individuals who are not involved in the energy industry. The main
objective is to implement renewable energy while engaging in cooperative energy
use (Wagemans et al. 2019). Energy cooperatives, also known as renewable energy
cooperatives (Wagemans et al. 2019; Schmid et al. 2020; Ahlemeyer et al. 2022),
are recognized and encouraged in several of the EU directives that promote the
transition to a more sustainable and democratic energy system. One such example
being Directive 2019/944 on Common Rules for the Internal Market in Electricity.
Although the two concepts (energy cooperatives and energy communities) overlap
in many respects and are often used interchangeably, there are some differences that
could lead to energy community being more widely used. Speciﬁcally, an energy
cooperative is a legal entity owned and controlled by its members who use it. Its
main objective is to provide energy services to its members, such as renewable energy
production and distribution, demand-side management, and energy efﬁciency, and
is regulated and governed by speciﬁc laws and rules. On the other hand, an energy
community is a group of individuals, organizations or companies that come together
to develop, produce, and consume energy in a joint and sustainable manner (Schmid
et al. 2020). Energy communities can include both cooperatives and other types of
organizations and aim to improve the energy sustainability of a given community or
territory. They can be regulated by speciﬁc laws and standards but can also be more
informal and ﬂexible initiatives. Therefore, the key difference between the two is
that energy cooperatives are legal entities, while energy communities can be more
informal and do not necessarily have a deﬁned legal structure. In addition, while
energy cooperatives focus primarily on providing energy services to their members,
energy communities have a broader focus that includes collaboration with other local
actors and the promotion of broader energy sustainability goals in the community
or territory in which they operate. The combination of the engaged stakeholders and
the form of initiatives is illustrated in Fig. 3.
The lack of a single deﬁnition for the initiatives can easily lead to confusion,
as well as proposals for more concepts (Hartmann and Palm 2023). At the same
time, however, there is no real single deﬁnition for energy communities, as this term
has different meanings and approaches depending on the context and the speciﬁc
objectives of each initiative. In fact, a diversity of deﬁnitions and approaches can be
10
A. Medina-Bousoño and J. Sierra
Fig. 3 Actors and initiatives. Source Authors
beneﬁcial with regard to fostering innovation and creativity in designing sustainable
energy solutions that are adapted to the needs of different communities and contexts.
4.2
Models of Interaction
As with the concepts, a wide variety of types of interaction models between different
actors have been identiﬁed in the literature. The three-levels-model, a framework
used to describe the local energy transition process, provides a structured approach
to analyzing the distribution of power and decision-making in energy transitions.
The local or micro context plays an important role in the regional energy transition
process. Factors such as geography, geology, meteorology, and demographics can
inﬂuence the production and use of renewable energy sources in different ways. The
economic regional (meso) structure can also impact the choice of renewable energy
sources, considering the different approaches required depending on the population
density. Finally, the macro level involves national and supranational policies that
provide a framework for local initiatives. In this context, a successful transition
depends on the ability of the stakeholders to enhance community empowerment
(Drewello 2022).
Thequadruplehelixisaframeworkthatunderlinestheimportanceofcollaboration
and co-creation between four stakeholders: government, industry, academia, and civil
society. According to Nijkamp et al. (2023), innovation and sustainable development
canonlybeachievedthroughtheparticipationofallfourstakeholders,whomustwork
together to identify and solve complex societal problems. However, the quadruple
helix does not reﬂect the difﬁculties of involving citizens in the process. Against
this background, the diabolo model of citizen participation was developed to include
local energy brokers, who act as the nexus between citizens and government bodies
(Nijkamp et al. 2023). The concept of co-production refers to the active involvement
of different actors, including citizens, in the design and delivery of public services.
Co-production is essential to achieve a more participatory and democratic process,
where citizens actively participate in the design and implementation of services. In
the energy sector it can have several beneﬁts, provided there is real collaboration
between the initiatives and the government, requiring careful planning, adequate
Empowering Citizens for Energy Communities in the European Union
11
resources, and a supportive institutional and policy framework (Soares da Silva and
Horlings 2020).
The strategic niche management (SNM) framework helps to explain the develop-
ment and diffusion of new technologies in complex social environments. Its central
idea is that new technologies are developed and nurtured within so-called niche envi-
ronments that provide the necessary conditions for innovation to occur. These niches
are typically small, protected spaces where innovators can experiment with new ideas
and approaches without being constrained by the dominant technological regime or
social norms (Koirala et al. 2018). Local action groups (LAGs) are groupings of
public and private actors, including local authorities, business organizations, NGOs,
and citizens, working together to promote sustainable development in local areas.
LAGs in general have great potential to become drivers of the change needed for
energy transition, if they are fostered by the local framework conditions in which
they operate (Kola-Bezka 2023). Community-based adaptation (CBA) is a bottom-
up approach that places local communities at the center of adaptation planning and
implementation. This model recognizes the important role that communities can play
inadaptingtotheimpactsofclimatechange.Theobjectivehereistoincreasethelong-
term resilience of local communities by enabling them to identify and implement
their own adaptation strategies. CBA involves community mobilization and participa-
tion, vulnerability and risk assessment, identiﬁcation and prioritization of adaptation
options, and the implementation of adaptation measures (Boeri et al. 2017). Finally,
the dialogue, access, risk management and transparency (DART) model is a partici-
patory approach for the development and implementation of sustainable energy plans
in local communities that emphasizes the importance of involving all stakeholders
in the energy transition process. In this model, ‘dialogue’ focuses on creating a plat-
form for open and inclusive discussions between stakeholders to ensure inclusion
with effective communication; ‘access’ increases the positive effects of participation
in their communication; ‘risk management’ underlines the importance of evaluating
the possible beneﬁts and risks of the development of initiatives; and the object of
‘transparency’ is to develop a good legal foundation in order to ensure that all actors
are of equal value, and that no one actor receives favorable treatment (Ryszawska
et al. 2021).
All these models of interaction have several common factors that make them
valid for energy communities. They are all based on collaboration and participation,
involvingeverymemberofthecommunityindecision-makingandprojectimplemen-
tation processes, thus increasing the commitment and motivation of the participants.
In addition, these models help citizens feel more empowered and engaged in the
energy community, which increases the likelihood of the long-term success of the
implemented projects.
As each energy community has its own speciﬁc characteristics and needs, making
a single model unsuitable for all communities, the existence of multiple different
models of stakeholder interaction in energy community development can be bene-
ﬁcial, and for several reasons. First, having access to a variety of models allows
communities to select the strategy that best satisﬁes their requirements and goals.
This can then stimulate innovation and creativity in the way that energy community
12
A. Medina-Bousoño and J. Sierra
development is approached. However, the availability of multiple options can also
have a negative side, potentially resulting in a lack of clarity and confusion about the
roles and responsibilities of each actor, as shown in Table 2. In the end, this may stunt
the growth of the projects. While the array of different models may make it easier to
understand and study socio-technical dynamics, the analysis that they provide is not
complete.
As seen in the table, all the models have advantages and disadvantages. The
three-levels-model helps to understand the barriers and opportunities faced by these
initiatives at different levels, but can be too simplistic, failing to consider the complex
interactions between the different levels and actors and potentially underestimating
the inﬂuence of the context and macroeconomic factors on the implementation of
community energy initiatives (Drewello 2022). While the quadruple helix model
encourages cooperation and teamwork between many actors and innovation and
creativity, it can be challenging to implement if the different actors ﬁnd it difﬁcult
to collaborate and potential disparities in the authority and inﬂuence of the various
Table 2 Models of stakeholder interaction
Model
Relevance for energy
communities
Drawbacks
References
Three-levels-model
Explains barriers at
different levels
Too simplistic; no
analysis of
interactions
Drewello (2022)
Quadruple helix
Fosters collaboration
and cooperation,
promotes innovation
and creativity
Difﬁcult to implement
Does not consider
power inequalities
Nijkamp et al.
(2023)
Diabolo model
Considers power
inequalities of the
different stakeholders
Does not provide a
clear framework for
evaluating impact
Nijkamp et al.
(2023)
Strategic niche
management
Develops learning
needs and fosters
collaboration between
initiatives
Focuses on internal
niche processes, not
on interactions
Koirala et al.
(2018)
Local action groups
Builds broad support
for local initiatives
Lack of ﬁnancial
perspective to
maintain projects
Kola-Bezka (2023)
Community-based
approach
Creates resilient
communities by
developing solutions
based on local
circumstances
Difﬁcult to scale up
and replicate
Boeri et al. (2017)
Dialogue, access, risk
management, and
transparency
Promotes
capacity-building
among participants
Requires time and
resources
Vulnerable to power
imbalances between
stakeholders
Ryszawska et al.
(2021)
Empowering Citizens for Energy Communities in the European Union
13
individuals might prevent some of them from contributing completely to the process
(Soares da Silva and Horlings 2020). The diabolo model makes it possible to identify
the factors that inﬂuence success, highlighting the signiﬁcance of user practices and
the institutional context in driving the adoption of novel community energy tech-
nology. It also underscores the importance of solution co-creation and co-design
among many stakeholders, including citizens, government, and industry. However,
it does not provide a clear framework for assessing the impact of community energy
efforts in terms of social and environmental consequences. Additionally, the theoret-
ical framework assumes that users are passive agents who embrace new technologies
based on their own preferences, rather than considering the role of power dynamics
and social structures in driving adoption processes (Soares da Silva and Horlings
2020). The SNM model emphasizes the importance of creating protected spaces for
experimentation and innovation, and one of its strengths is that it stresses the impor-
tance of communication between the different actors. However, it does not include
a clear framework to evaluate the impact of innovation on social and environmental
outcomes. Furthermore, as it proposes that innovations develop from niches before
spreading to broader contexts, it ignores the effect of social and cultural norms on
the diffusion process. Finally, it does not address the issue of equity and the potential
for innovations to exacerbate existing inequalities (Koirala et al. 2018). The LAG
model offers a framework to involve a wide range of local stakeholders, helping to
build broad support for community energy projects and, thus, increase the likelihood
of their success. However, it can be difﬁcult to maintain the required momentum and
commitment over time, as when LAGs are set up with initial funding and support from
external sources, but the ﬁnancing comes to an end. In addition, LAGs at times ﬁnd
it onerous to balance competing interests and priorities among different stakeholder
groups (Kola-Bezka 2023). The community-based approach, in turn, emphasizes
building strong communities by developing their resilience and ability to adapt to the
different challenges that may arise. By involving the entire community, the model
can build trust and foster social cohesion, while indirectly improving health and
wellbeing and increasing economic and employment opportunities, thereby creating
greater social capital. However, the model can be difﬁcult to scale up and replicate
in different contexts and regions; the success of community energy projects is highly
dependent on cultural and social factors as well as the political environment of the
community itself, which can create barriers, especially when seeking funding (Boeri
et al. 2017). Finally, while the DART model builds trust and understanding between
different stakeholder groups, promoting learning and capacity-building among the
participants and encouraging inclusion in community energy projects, its implemen-
tation requires signiﬁcant time and resources, and its effectiveness can be vulnerable
to power imbalances between stakeholders (Ryszawska et al. 2021).
14
A. Medina-Bousoño and J. Sierra
4.3
Motives and Incentives
While most of the literature argues that protecting the environment from climate
change and a sense of belonging to the community are the key drivers of decision-
making (Soeiro and Ferreira Dias 2020), some authors have also identiﬁed monetary
incentives as one of the main reasons that community members participate in citizen-
led energy transitions. Thus, a mix of ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial incentives usually
inﬂuence citizens (Ryszawska et al. 2021). However, these factors do not apply to
all population types. Indeed, in many cases, the population is often idealized as a
homogenous community, when the reality is quite the contrary.
The most consequential behavioral changes in this respect tend to occur among the
older population. Individuals with higher purchasing power are often more reluctant
to change their minds because they have more resources to maintain their current
lifestyle, leading them to focus on short-term gains and oblivious to the long-term
beneﬁts of community energy initiatives. But at the same time the elderly may have a
greater sense of community and social responsibility, as they have had more time to
develop and build relationships where they live, making them more willing to work
together towards a common goal and more concerned about the long-term impact of
their actions on the environment and future generations (Radtke et al. 2022).
In addition to generational and ﬁnancial inﬂuences, motives, and incentives to
participate in energy communities often vary from country to country due to their
unique cultural, political, economic, and social factors. In particular, a country’s
energy policy can be a key factor inﬂuencing participation in energy communities
(de Waal and Stremke 2014; Hager 2015). Financial policies also play a crucial role.
For instance, high energy tariffs can motivate people to search for cheaper alternatives
like energy communities. Finally, there is a signiﬁcant difference between countries
where the community culture is more developed, and the sense of citizenship and
belonging is more deeply rooted than those that lack these characteristics.
As a last example of incentives, bottom-up energy transition narratives play a
part in assessing how global challenges have been translated into local realities and,
above all, into success stories. In line with this, creating a narrative enhances the
value of being part of a community striving for change and increases the acceptance
of renewable energy through ﬁnancial participation and an emotional attachment to
the project (David and Schönborn 2018).
4.4
Barriers
The list of barriers to and challenges faced by energy communities that can hinder
their implementation and development is varied in nature. Narratives about energy
transition, for example, can become contentious and polarizing, because they are
intertwined with the complex social, political, and economic issues in each country,
creatingcontroversiesovereconomiccostsandbeneﬁts(DavidandSchönborn2018).
Empowering Citizens for Energy Communities in the European Union
15
Additionally, starting and operating an energy community may require signiﬁcant
upfront capital investment. A lack of access to ﬁnance can limit the ability of
energycommunitiestoinvestininfrastructureandothernecessaryresources.Without
possible funding from the public sector, in many situations these energy communi-
ties remain an idea, with no possibility of being enacted (Kloppenburg et al. 2019).
Geopolitical factors can also pose challenges. For example, concerns about national
security and balance of power can be raised by shifting to renewable energy sources,
as some countries currently dependent on fossil fuels become less important in the
global energy market (Drewello 2022).
Also, energy communities require technical expertise to design, install and operate
their infrastructure. Accordingly, a lack of technical expertise or necessary resources
can limit the ability of energy communities to develop. Moreover, many citizens
are not aware of the beneﬁts of energy communities or do not understand how they
work, making it complicated for the communities to attract new members or gain
support from policymakers (Nouri et al. 2022). Energy communities are also often
subject to complex and sometimes conﬂicting regulations at the national and local
levels, which can limit their ability to operate or access ﬁnancial incentives and other
support. By the same token, energy communities can disrupt the established energy
market, which can lead to resistance from existing energy suppliers, who may see
them as competition and try to block their development. Consequently, municipalities
must be provided with the necessary knowledge and expertise to initiate communi-
ties, while institutional and legal frameworks often slow innovation projects down
(Beauchampet and Walsh 2021).
Another major problem is the lack of transparency in government decision-
making, which can lead to citizens and the different actors involved in the processes
of these initiatives to feel excluded from the process around energy communities
(Lennon et al. 2019). Often, a large communication barrier between stakeholders
makes the development of these projects impossible (Nouri et al. 2022). Suprana-
tional policies for an idealized community frequently do not take local realities into
consideration and have a limited view or lack of understanding of the local realities
in different countries and regions. In addition, they may develop in a restricted time
frame and with limited resources, hindering the ability to research and understand
local realities in depth. Finally, the affected communities are often not involved in the
policy formulation process. This can lead to policies that do not reﬂect the needs and
concerns of communities and may be inadequate or ineffective in practice (Radtke
et al. 2022).
However, the most important barrier to these initiatives appears at the local level.
While the energy transition may be clear at the supranational or national level, it may
not always be obvious at the sub-national, regional and local levels (Dam and van der
Windt 2022). However, it is crucial to consider these scales because energy transition
is ultimately a bottom-up process that depends on the participation and engagement
of communities and stakeholders at the local level. At sub-national, regional and local
scales, the energy transition can take various forms, depending on the local context,
resources and priorities. By taking this into account, the transition can be tailored to
meet the speciﬁc needs and challenges of different communities and stakeholders.
16
A. Medina-Bousoño and J. Sierra
This can help ensure that the transition is equitable, inclusive, and sustainable, and
that it addresses the speciﬁc energy challenges and opportunities faced by different
regions and communities. State governments also need to ensure that there is good
communication between supranational, national, and municipal levels.
5
Conclusion
In the current urgent global environmental and social crisis, it’s essential to develop
strategies towards sustainable development. In advocating for the shift towards a
society reliant on renewable energy sources, such as a low-carbon society, there is
a growing emphasis on the importance of energy communities. In this regard, this
chapter has explored the importance of energy communities as one of the instruments
that can contribute to improving economic, social, and environmental sustainability
from the perspective of energy production with renewable sources. It is also one of
the areas where participatory methods in public decision making are gaining more
prominence in recent years as mechanisms for enhancing citizen engagement in
sustainability policy.
Energy transitions should empower both individuals and communities, empha-
sizing sustainable energy endeavors. With the progression of decentralized produc-
tion technologies, there has been a growing interest in energy communities. However,
achieving a successful and fair energy transition doesn’t solely rely on technological
advancements. In this regard, it is essential to improve decision-making processes to
make them more inclusive and participatory. This requires a fusion of thorough anal-
ysis, expertise in engineering and spatial planning, and insights from social sciences.
Acknowledging the need to address global challenges at the local level, the transi-
tion to decentralized energy systems represents a crucial advancement towards more
sustainable and resilient societies.
Against this background, citizens are key stakeholders as they are directly affected
by energy policies and infrastructures. The creation of energy communities can be
seen as a form of citizen empowerment and as a response to a democratic deﬁcit. In
somecases,citizensmayfeelthattheyhavenosayinenergy-relateddecision-making,
and these participatory approaches can be useful to regain control and involvement in
this area. It also creates peoples’ empowerment, as it involves the direct participation
of local communities. Hence, their perspectives and needs can be better incorpo-
rated into the transition plan, which can lead to greater community acceptance and
support. In addition, when citizens are informed and engaged, they can help increase
awareness and momentum for renewable energy projects, which can lead to more
widespread adoption and support. Overall, this can contribute to greater sustainability
and resilience.
The way in which energy communities are created and managed may determine
whether they are an effective and fair form of citizen empowerment or simply a
temporary stopgap to a broader problem of democratic deﬁcit. The development of
community-owned renewable energy projects contributes to more distributed energy
Empowering Citizens for Energy Communities in the European Union
17
generation and less reliance on centralized power plants, leading directly to greater
energy security and independence, as well as other local economic beneﬁts. The
perception of local governments and the possible communications relevant actors
can determine the degree of success of the local energy transition process.
This study is affected by some limitations. Using Scopus as the only biblio-
graphic database may have excluded some useful documents. In addition, since only
articles in English were selected, some particularities from local contexts may not be
reﬂected. The same applies to the fact that we included research articles only. Taking
this into consideration, future research may beneﬁt from exploring a wider range of
documents in different languages. In addition to this, it would be very interesting
to examine the legal and regulatory frameworks of energy communities in non-EU
countries, to draw distinctions between different contexts and identify possible key
points for enhancing the development of energy communities.
In the face of current and future energy crises, energy communities as citizens’
initiatives are a powerful tool. The private sector is also very relevant in the energy
transition, and many companies recognize the opportunities and beneﬁts that can
arise from energy communities, even though they can also be seen as a competitor.
Ultimately, it becomes crucial to develop an appropriate regulatory framework. To
accomplish this, dialogue between the private sector, energy communities, and the
public sector is essential to overcome resistance and move towards a more sustainable
and democratic energy system.
References
Abada I, Ehrenmann A, Lambin X (2020) On the viability of energy communities. Energy J
41(1):113–150. https://doi.org/10.5547/01956574.41.1.IABA
Ahlemeyer K, Griese KM, Wawer T et al (2022) Success factors of citizen energy cooperatives in
north western Germany: a conceptual and empirical review. Energ Sustain Soc 12:29. https://
doi.org/10.1186/s13705-022-00354-4
Beauchampet I, Walsh B (2021) Energy citizenship in the Netherlands: the complexities of public
engagement in a large-scale energy transition. Energy Res Soc Sci 76(102056):102056. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2021.102056
Boeri A, Longo D, Gianfrate V, Lorenzo V (2017) Resilient communities. Social infrastructures for
sustainable growth of urban areas. A case study. Int J Sustain Dev Plan 12(02):227–237. https://
doi.org/10.2495/sdp-v12-n2-227-237
Dacombe R, Parvin P (2021) Participatory democracy in an age of inequality. Representation
57(2):145–157. https://doi.org/10.1080/00344893.2021.1933151
David M, Schönborn S (2018) Bottom-up energy transition narratives: linking the global with the
local? a comparison of three German renewable co-ops. Sustainability 10(4):924. https://doi.
org/10.3390/su10040924
de Waal R, Stremke S (2014) Energy transition: Missed opportunities and emerging challenges for
landscape planning and designing. Sustainability 6(7):4386–4415. https://doi.org/10.3390/su6
074386
Donthu N, Kumar S, Mukherjee D, Pandey N, Lim WM (2021) How to conduct a bibliometric
analysis: an overview and guidelines. J Bus Res 133:285–296. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.
2021.04.070
18
A. Medina-Bousoño and J. Sierra
Drewello H (2022) Towards a theory of local energy transition. Sustainability 14(18):11119. https://
doi.org/10.3390/su141811119
European Commission (2019). Communication (EC) COM/2019/640. Communication from the
Commission to the European Parliament, the European Council, the Council, the European
Economic and Social Committee and the Committee Of The Regions: The European Green
Deal. 11th December 2019 European Commission, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?qid=1576150542719&uri=COM%3A2019%3A640%3AFIN
European
Commission
(2020)
Horizon.
Research
and
innovation.
European
Commis-
sion. https://research-and-innovation.ec.europa.eu/funding/funding-opportunities/funding-pro
grammes-and-open-calls/horizon-2020_en
European Commission (2022). Communication (EC) COM/2022/230. Communication from the
Commission to the European Parliament, the European Council, the Council, the European
Economic and Social Committee and the Committee Of The Regions: Plan REPowerEU. 18th
May 2022 European Commission, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?qid=157
6150542719&uri=COM%3A2019%3A640%3AFIN
European Commission (2023) Energy Communities. https://energy.ec.europa.eu/topics/markets-
and-consumers/energy-communities_en
Filho L, Walter LV, Trevisan AL, Salvia JM, Dibbern T, Ruiz S, de Maya E, Bernal F et al (2024)
Prosumers and sustainable development: an international assessment in the ﬁeld of renewable
energy. Sustain Futures 7(June):100158. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SFTR.2024.100158
Hager C (2015) Germany’s green energy revolution-challenging the theory and practice of
institutional change. German Politics Soc 33(3):1–27
Hartmann K, Palm J(2023) The role of thermal energy communities in Germany’s heating transition.
Front Sustain Cities 4. https://doi.org/10.3389/frsc.2022.1027148
Hoicka CE, Lowitzsch J, Brisbois MC, Kumar A, Camargo LR (2021) Implementing a just renew-
able energy transition: policy advice for transposing the New European rules for renewable
energycommunities.EnergyPolicy156(September):112435.https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENPOL.
2021.112435
Kloppenburg S, Smale R, Verkade N (2019) Technologies of engagement: how battery storage tech-
nologies shape householder participation in energy transitions. Energies 12(22):4384. https://
doi.org/10.3390/en12224384
Koirala BP,vanOost E,vanderWindt H(2018)Communityenergystorage: a responsible innovation
towards a sustainable energy system? Appl Energy 231:570–585. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ape
nergy.2018.09.163
Kola-Bezka M (2023) Think global act local: In search for ways to increase the engagement of
local communities in energy transition. Energy Rep 9:1668–1683. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
egyr.2022.12.143
Lennon B, Dunphy NP, Sanvicente E (2019) Community acceptability and the energy transition: a
citizens’ perspective. Energ Sustain Soc 9:35. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13705-019-0218-z
Nijkamp P, Kourtit K, Scholten H, Willemsen E (2023) Citizen participation and knowledge support
in urban public energy transition—a quadruple helix perspective. Land 12(2):395. https://doi.
org/10.3390/land12020395
Nouri A, Khadem S, Mutule A, Papadimitriou C, Stanev R, Cabiati M, Keane A, Carroll P (2022)
Identiﬁcation of gaps and barriers in regulations, standards, and network codes to energy citizen
participation in the energy transition. Energies 15(3):856. https://doi.org/10.3390/en15030856
OECD (2020) Innovative citizen participation and new democratic institutions: catching the
deliberative wave. OECD Publishing, Paris. https://doi.org/10.1787/339306da-en
Otamendi-Irizar I, Olatz Grijalba AA, Pennese C, Hernández R (2022) How can local energy
communities promote sustainable development in European Cities? Energy Res Soc Sci 84.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2021.102363
Radtke J, Yildiz Ö, Roth L (2022) Does energy community membership change sustainable attitudes
and behavioral patterns? empirical evidence from community wind energy in Germany. Energies
15(3):822. https://doi.org/10.3390/en15030822
Empowering Citizens for Energy Communities in the European Union
19
Ryszawska B, Rozwadowska M, Ulatowska R, Pierzchała M, Szymański P (2021) The power
of co-creation in the energy transition—DART model in citizen energy communities projects.
Energies 14(17):5266. https://doi.org/10.3390/en14175266
Schmid B, Meister T, Klagge B, Seidl I (2020) Energy cooperatives and municipalities in local
energy governance arrangements in Switzerland and Germany. J Environ Dev 29(1):123–146.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1070496519886013
Schwanitz VJ, Wierling A, Arghandeh Paudler H, von Beck C, Dufner S, Koren IK, Kraudzun T,
Marcroft T, Mueller L, Zeiss JP (2023) Statistical evidence for the contribution of citizen-led
initiatives and projects to the energy transition in Europe. Sci Rep 13(1):1342. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-023-28504-4
Soares da Silva D, Horlings LG (2020) The role of local energy initiatives in co- producing
sustainable places. Sustain Sci 15(2):363–377. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-019-00762-0
Soeiro S, Ferreira Dias M (2020) Renewable energy community and the European energy market:
main motivations. Heliyon 6(7):e04511. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2020.e04511
Sweileh WM (2020) Bibliometric analysis of scientiﬁc publications on «sustainable development
goals» with emphasis on «good health and well-being» goal (2015–2019). Glob Health 16(1):68.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12992-020-00602-2
Szulecki K (2018) Conceptualizing energy democracy. Environ Politics 27(1):21–41. https://doi.
org/10.1080/09644016.2017.1387294
Tomor Z (2019) The Citipreneur: how a local entrepreneur creates public value through smart
technologies and strategies. Int J Public Sect Manag 32(5):508–529. https://doi.org/10.1108/
ijpsm-02-2018-0060
van Dam KIM, van der Windt HJ (2022) Islands as playing and breeding grounds for incumbents,
entrepreneurial technologists, policymakers, and engaged citizens: the case of energy transition
on Ameland. Sustainability 14(13):7839. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14137839
Wagemans D, Scholl C, Vasseur V (2019) Facilitating the energy transition—the governance role
of local renewable energy cooperatives. Energies 12(21):4171. https://doi.org/10.3390/en1221
4171
Edible Weeds in Agricultural Landscapes
as a Research Emphasis for Sustainability
Bruno Borsari and Malcolm F. Vidrine
Abstract Weeds have been attributed negative connotations since an expansion of
monocultures gained increasing worldwide support. For the last forty years however,
agroecology has been emerging as a respectable paradigm for sustainable agriculture,
which exposes the ﬂaws of industrial farming and its implications for resource deple-
tion and environmental degradation. Within an agroecological framework, weeds
have become more appreciated for spurring agrobiodiversity and providing a variety
of ecological services, including culinary uses. Therefore, there is a compelling need
to re-consider management practices that were initially conceived to eradicate weeds
from agroecosystems. This chapter aimed at highlighting ecological approaches in
controlling and/or even enhancing weeds populations in agricultural landscapes for
nutrition purposes. Through a systematic review of the literature we described present
knowledges available for managing edible weeds in agroecosystems in the U.S., with
a focus on uses and ecological services these provide. Our study suggests that weeds
may contribute effectively to human nutrition and to environmental health. In addi-
tion, we present ideas that may inspire more growers to redesign and manage farms
through agroecological principles and approaches that are conservative of native
plant communities. Many of these plants that are becoming marketable as vegetables
are appreciated also for diversifying human diets as well as ecosystems. Although the
idea of consuming wild plants is not new, an emerging interest in edible weeds looks
promising as a research agenda for an enhancement of sustainability in agriculture,
with its beneﬁts extending from agroecosystems to food systems and public health.
Keywords Agroecosystems · Edible weeds · Food · Rewilding · Sustainability ·
Weed management
B. Borsari (B)
Department of Biology, Winona State University, Winona, MN, USA
e-mail: bborsari@winona.edu
M. F. Vidrine
Division of Arts & Sciences, Louisiana State University-Eunice, Eunice, LA, USA
e-mail: mvidrine@lsue.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_2
21
22
B. Borsari and M. F. Vidrine
1
Introduction
Although the ecological and economic effects of weeds have impacted crop yields
since the dawn of agriculture, many of these unwanted plants were collected and
routinely consumed by our farming ancestors (Pfeiffer 1970; Rapoport et al. 1995;
Turner et al. 2011). Similarly, early Cajuns (Louisiana French Acadians) harvested
crawﬁsh (Procambarus clarkii) and ate them—these, too, were once considered
‘weeds’ among invertebrate animals, and now, they are a delicacy that generates more
than $423 million every year (Smith 2020). In many locations of the U.S. Gulf region,
they are the only crop providing real income, whereas the others (rice and soybeans)
require subsidies and insurance as a result of routine failings. Nonetheless, weeds
remain notorious for harming crops through competition of resources and/or inter-
ferences with their growth via allelopathy (Putnam et al. 1983; Batish et al. 2006). In
many competitive interactions with cultivated plants, weeds are capable of securing
critical resources, like space, water, nutrients, and sunlight, at the detriment of agri-
cultural crops, depending on a variety of conditions related to speciﬁc environments
(Gliessman 2015). However, competition for soil moisture should not be a problem
for agronomic species growing on healthy soils that receive abundant precipitation.
For example, weeds like purslane (Portulaca spp.) seldom compete with cultivated
plants for sunlight, because its leaves grow parallel to the ground surface. In addi-
tion, Lampkin (1999) explained that when desired crops develop deep root systems,
shallow-rooted weeds absorb water and nutrients at depths near the surface of a soil
proﬁle, thus, competing gently for these resources. Yet, most crops struggle against
weeds for all these resources, making the control of their populations and distribu-
tion a major agricultural chore. For these reasons, weed management has focused on
minimizing the presence of non-crops in cultivated ﬁelds, in spite of the use of many
wild species as spices, seasonal foods, or medicine.
Rather than being cultivated, edible weeds can also be collected from remnant
areas of wilderness, within agroecosystems or in their immediate vicinity (Turner
et al. 2011). According to Yakovleva (2020), typical sites on farms, where weeds
may thrive, are disturbed areas, the edges of cultivated ﬁelds, paths along farm
implements routes, and/or in the vicinity of composting sites and built infrastructures
(barns, greenhouses and other buildings). Weeds can thrive in these spaces, spurring
agroecosystems’ biodiversity, while contributing to the health of landscapes through
a variety of ecological services, beneﬁtting farms and wildlife habitats (Altieri 1995;
Jackson and Jackson 2002). For example, weeds protect soils from erosion (Weil and
Brady 2017) and/or serve as pollen and nectar sources for insects and more biota
(Pickett and Bugg 1998). Also, many weed species are consumed by herbivores
including people thus, contributing with nutrients towards a diversiﬁcation of human
and livestock nutrition that beneﬁt the health and well-being of all heterotrophs.
Even omnivores like the already mentioned crawﬁsh, consume much of the weeds
growing in their ponds. Also, nymphs of the Green Darner dragonﬂy (Anax junius)—
an insect predator, inhabit crawﬁsh habitats all winter season, feeding on the newly
emerging crustaceans. However, as winter transitions into spring, the young crawﬁsh
Edible Weeds in Agricultural Landscapes as a Research Emphasis …
23
begins consuming the dragonﬂy nymphs (Huner 1994). These intersecting cycles are
key to thriving environments and economies and depend from an effective function-
ality of carbon cycling. Eliminating the dragonﬂies may appear necessary manage-
ment but in actuality, it hampers the cycle of the crawﬁsh. Weeds participate in anal-
ogous cycles thus, attempting to eradicate these from crops could become dangerous
to the ecology of agroecosystems!
Current models for growing agronomic crops employ mainly genetically engi-
neered (GE) cultivars and the use of powerful, yet toxic, endocrine disrup-
tors (glyphosate, atrazine, neonicotinoids, organophosphates, and more). These
molecules are also detrimental to weed development in a cropping system, both
because they serve not only as herbicides but also as insecticides thus, killing plants,
insectsnecessarytopollinatetheplants,birdsandﬁshfeedingontheweeds.However,
social acceptance of GE cultivars could change, and when large segments of the popu-
lation learn that food production relies on endocrine disruptors, this may result in
potential ‘food fear,’ hampering existing food chains. For example, the impacts of
insecticides on juvenile crawﬁsh (when noted and denounced by farmers and the
public), changed the entire chemical application scheme in rice ﬁelds intercropped
with these crustaceans, in south Louisiana (Stout et al. 2011).
This work summarizes current knowledges (western and indigenous) about
managing edible weeds in agroecosystems, with a focus on their uses and ecological
services these provide as a viable research agenda for sustainable development. In
addition, we present ideas that may inspire more growers to redesign and manage
farms through agroecological principles and approaches that are conservative of
native plant communities. Within this framework, edible weeds could offer dietary
opportunities for human and livestock species that from the One-Health-theory
perspective (Xie et al. 2017), may extend their beneﬁts to agriculture, with potential
to establish new, thriving economies, while boosting agrobiodiversity. Wilson (2016)
suggested farming only half of all lands, to leave the remaining half to be rewilded.
Similarly, the U.N. clarion calls for rewilding 30% of lands by 2030, suggesting the
global need to rethink agriculture and native plant resources!
Furthermore, agricultural soils are recurring themes central to our discussion
(Lymbery 2022), suggesting ideas that weed species can add signiﬁcantly to the
health of ecosystems and organismal communities of which human beings are part.
According to Edgeworth (2023) landscapes manipulated by humans, are more than a
parchment of symbols, remains, tracks and residues of their activities that determine
inevitable changes to land, no matter whether these are human-caused or non-human
forces yet, they are inseparably associated with what happens to the entire Earth
system.
24
B. Borsari and M. F. Vidrine
2
Methodology
This study consisted in a detailed and critical review of the literature about salient
aspectsofweedmanagementintheU.S.,withaspeciﬁcfocusabouttheirfeasibilityto
be employed more noticeably, as novel foods. Our research effort aimed at shedding
a new light on weed species especially, for expanding their uses in human nutri-
tion but also to substantiate their ecological values and services to ecosystems and
agroecosystems (Gliessman et al. 2023). The convergence of these themes aimed
at identifying possible research venues that could even make weeds attractive for
achieving sustainability in the agricultural sciences. From a broader perspective,
Patten (2004) pointed out that, literature reviews can be of interest for detecting what
has been written about speciﬁc topics, while assisting researchers to determine the
degree of knowledge gained in certain research sectors, and whether any trends exist
among these.
3
The Ambiguous Nature of Weeds: Friends or Foes?
According to an old linguistic dichotomy, non-crop plants classiﬁed as ‘weeds’ can
be bad, or good, depending on how, or under what occurrences they are assessed.
Tompkins and Bird (1989, p. 163) explained that: “The old English word ‘weod’,
since become ‘weed’ had a double meaning as it was spoken in the Kingdom to
about 1100. Its pejorative overtone, when it referred to plants tending to overgrow
or choke out more desirable ones cultivated for food, was applied to their being
entirely worthless but to their being without value when growing in certain locations.
Weed could also mean herb-derived from the Latin herba-or any plant that does not
develop persistent woody tissue but like grasses dies back at the end of each growing
season. To add to the confusion, the term herb also applied more restrictedly to a
class of plants having savory, aromatic, or medicinal value”. Most agroecologists
would agree that weeds are plants whose properties and value yet remain to be
discovered, thus, an understanding of weed ecology becomes necessary to appreciate
the multifaceted roles that these plants play in every agrarian landscape (Gliessman
et al. 2023; Altieri 1995). After all, non-crop plants collected from the wild have
been used for millennia for a variety of uses beyond food (Fritz 2019) and it appears
that in a pre-industrialized world, weeds co-existed more harmoniously with humans.
Therefore, noxious characterizations of weeds are not only due to farming expansions
achieved through technological breakthroughs of 20th century agriculture, but also
through an infusion of Christian ideology that became established in America with
the arrival of European conquistadors and pilgrims, since the discovery of the ‘New
World’ (Borsari and DeGrazia 2015).
Edible Weeds in Agricultural Landscapes as a Research Emphasis …
25
3.1
Edible Weeds of the Prairie Biome
The grasslands of North America possess a unique assortment of plant commu-
nities, which are supported by thriving, living counterparts within the soil food-
web of prairies. The plants were used in several human-based economies and in a
host of ecosystem economies that created soil and clean water in a hydrologically-
balanced system, ultimately supporting diverse downstream terrestrial and aquatic
plant, fungal and animal communities in marshes, rivers and oceans (Vidrine 2010).
In the North American continent, these prairies stretched from what are now the
southern, central provinces of Canada to the Gulf of Mexico and from the Rockies
to the Appalachian Mountains. This interwoven network of ecosystems is part of the
prairie biome and shares distinctive climatic conditions, that have been conducive
in evolving unique communities dominated by herbaceous plants, rather than trees
(Smith and Smith 2014). Rain precipitation ranges between 25 and 100 cm/year, and
this limiting factor has been regulating the ecology of North American grasslands
from tallgrass prairie in the east to a drier mixed-grass prairie that begins in the U.S.
Midwest, to a short-grass prairie, nestled further west, on the east side of the Rocky
Mountains (Borsari and Vidrine 2023).
According to Duke (1992), Indigenous Americans used more than 1,000 plant
species as food, which accounts for about the 6% of 18,956 species of the ﬂowering
plants in this continent. Also, Allen and his collaborators (2005) accurately reported
the abundance of edible, wild plants of the southern U.S. coastal prairie region.
Regretfully, these North American prairies have been replaced by pasture, crop land
(364 million hectares), and cityscapes (Borsari and Kunnas 2020), that include 16
million hectares of lawns (Tallamy 2020). Historically, these plant communities were
highly diverse and supported large populations of herbivores and their predators; they
also nourished, sheltered, clothed and healed the numerous indigenous communities
who inhabited the prairie biome (Fritz 2019). We argue that indigenous knowledge of
non-crop plants uses contributed to the health and aided the successful establishment
of European colonists in North America (Vidrine et al. 2001).
All prairies host weeds with many symbiotic relationships, while protecting their
soil. A study by Hirsch and colleagues (2013) indicated that a conversion of 10–
20% of cropland into prairie buffer strips in Iowa re-established iconic perennial
species of native prairies without increasing densities of weeds in adjacent culti-
vated ﬁelds. To reiterate the worth of wild plants (Cocannauer 1980) explained that,
milkweeds (Asclepias spp.), goldenrods (Solidago, spp.), ironweeds (Vernonia, spp.),
thistles (Cirsium, spp.) and more, sustain the prairie grasses in an obligatory relation-
ship. Additionally, many other prairie species, like sow thistle (Sonchus oleraceus),
lamb’s quarter (Chenopodium album), smooth-leaf pigweed (Amaranthus hybridus),
stingingnettles(Urticaspp.),dandelion(Taraxacumofﬁcinale),wildlettuce(Lactuca
virosa), are edible, and they must have played important roles for the sustenance of
indigenous peoples and early, European prairie-settlers.
26
B. Borsari and M. F. Vidrine
3.2
Edible Weeds in Indigenous Cultures
In pre-agriculture times, humans’ food choices must have relied heavily on wild
plants. This traditional, ecological knowledge (TEK) of wild, edible plants was trans-
ferred through generations among indigenous cultures, as wild food plants continue
to be a source of cultural identity, both reﬂecting an important body of environmental
understanding, survival, and sustainable living (Turner et al. 2011). This habit is often
embedded within animist worldviews, where nature is conceived as a spiritual entity,
nurturing all living beings. The conceptualization of nature by indigenous people
highlights a unique predisposition of trust for it, that tends to harmonize human
interactions with their physical habitat and other living beings, transforming the
relationship with nature into a co-evolutionary one, between individuals and land-
scape (Aswani et al. 2018). Consequently, an ecological agriculture depends upon
interactions with all forms of life because we, humans, relate intimately with all the
places in which we reside (Provenza et al. 2013).
Tompkins and Bird (1989) reported that in the Kalahari Desert of south Africa,
the Kung bushmen relied on 85 wild plant species, never once setting eyes on the
less than a dozen plants that now make up a 75% of the human diet around the
world. For this reason, traditional home gardens and indigenous farms in countries,
where agriculture is a subsistence activity, continue to champion biodiversity conser-
vation, while, fulﬁlling the nutrition needs of indigenous communities (Orsini et al.
2013). A case study from Perú suggested that edible weeds are increasingly managed
in deforested areas both in-situ and ex-situ, demonstrating farmers’ adaptability at
securing food under circumstances of extreme disturbances, in this tropical region
of the Amazon (Cruz-Garcia 2017). More examples of weed use and consumption
come from studies conducted in China (Zhang et al. 2015) and the Philippines (Tan
Chua-Barcelo 2014). An additional report from Brazil (Sanchez-Bel et al. 2015)
substantiated the relevance that edible weeds continue having in the human diet as
food.
4
Researching Management Tactics for Promoting Edible
Weeds
The management of weeds in agriculture, whether edible or not, has traditionally
focused on physical methods (e.g.: hoeing, pulling, cultivating or ﬂaming), whereas
the spraying of herbicides is getting traction with an increasing agricultural indus-
trialization. Common knowledge infers weeds are pioneer species thriving on land-
scapes whose soils are frequently disturbed, like agricultural soils (Magdoff and Van
Es 2009). From this perspective they are cover crops, making their presence toler-
able and even cherished by agriculturists, when their densities can be maintained at
levels that do not affect the performance of cultivated crops (Lampkin 1999). Yet,
abstaining from herbicides use, as in organic agriculture, makes these farms more
Edible Weeds in Agricultural Landscapes as a Research Emphasis …
27
susceptible to weed establishment. For example, a study in long-term crop rotations
from Nebraska showed that weed seedbank and above-ground weed populations were
higher in organic-grown crops, indicating a need for more intense management in
long-term organic rotations that include annual crop species; however, results showed
also that including a perennial forage crop in organic rotations reduces broadleaf
weed seedbank populations (Wortman et al. 2010). With an emerging interest in
weeds as foods, substantial changes are sought in managing wild plants on farms.
Nonetheless, weeds continue to be monitored attentively, and through agroecology,
several practices are available to reduce their populations, without having to rely on
herbicides (Gliessman et al. 2023).
4.1
Weeds Ecological Control Strategies and Farm Design
Polyculture systems like orchards, vineyards and/or agroforestry systems (alley crop-
ping, silvopasture, riparian buffer zones), are more tolerant for the coexistence of
agronomic crops with weeds than for monocultures (Stanek et al. 2019). An ecolog-
ical management of weeds in these and similar systems, including permaculture,
demands strategies that employ holistic approaches. According to Ferguson and
Lovell (2017), frequent ﬁeld observations, long-term planning and adaptations to
the characteristics of local soils, topography and other environmental conditions,
constitute typical strategies for an ecological control of unwanted plants. Unavoid-
ably, farms and gardens require a design for growing spaces and crop rows with
distancing among plants for minimal cultivation to reduce soil loss and disturbance.
Although more labor intensive, the intercropping “coltura promiscua” of northeastern
Italy exempliﬁes a traditional ﬁeld design, which accommodates multiple herbaceous
species, including fruit trees and grapevines (Ferrario 2021). This design approach
remains a tangible demonstration of a multifunctionally-productive landscape, that
to this day continues to fulﬁl human needs, while boosting biodiversity and ecolog-
ical services. Thus, weeding may become even an obsolete practice when farmers
understand that the interactions among all the parts of an agroecosystem are multi-
faceted (Fukuoka 1985). However, a few speciﬁc principles for weed control should
always be considered, and these refer to knowing the weed species that are present,
because these vary in their growth patterns, phenology, and interactions with culti-
vated crops. Therefore, an accurate identiﬁcation at every stage of weed development
is critical for an effective management, planning and implementation in and around
agroecosystems (Altieri 1995). More valuable traits of weed species relevant for
their identiﬁcation and control include: time of emergence, conditions that trigger
seeds germination, growth rate and height, allelopathic potential, time to ﬂowering,
seed setting, and methods of seed dispersal (Carlberg 2014). These assist farmers in
realizing at what stage of their biological cycle can weeds become most vulnerable
or palatable for herbivores (Lampkin 1999; Magdoff and Van Es 2009), including
humans.
28
B. Borsari and M. F. Vidrine
Limiting the niches for weed growth is also very important because weeds are
adapted to prosper in disturbed environments, which are typical conditions in farms
and/or gardens. Therefore, reducing soil cultivation, while keeping it protected with
cover crops or mulches are viable ecological practices to control weeds, where these
are unwanted. Also, maximizing heterogeneity in time and space can boost diversity
and enhance agroecosystems health, while permitting adaptive management of all
plants, including non-crop species (Jackson and Jackson 2002).
Understanding weeds’ reproduction and dispersal patterns is important too,
because annual weeds are r-strategists that germinate rapidly, yielding copious
numbers of seeds that remain viable in the soil, for years. Literally, every seed can
produce thousands of new plants, thus, determining exponential population growths
(Gliessman et al. 2023). The key to controlling weeds lies in constraining their repro-
ductive capabilities, while developing strategies aimed at reducing their seed bank
(Wilson 1988), which makes essential the biological knowledge of every species.
4.2
Research About Managing the Growth of Edible Weeds
Most of the weeds that are economically important are not invasive and need special
culture just as agronomic crops. Among these, notable, species in the Poaceae (grass
family), are Eastern gamagrass (Tripsacum dactyloides) and kernza (Thinopyrum
intermedium), that together with some perennial sunﬂowers (Asteraceae), have been
studiedatTheLandInstituteaspromisingfoodsources(SouleandPiper 1991).These
perennial plants re-emerge to the soil surface from apical meristems located on the
tips of their massive root system, at the onset of a new growing season, yielding food
in abundance without the need for agrichemical applications or tillage, all-the-while
demonstrating a sustainable potential for shifting agriculture from the cultivation of
annual to perennial species (Fig. 1).
Propagating edible weeds differs from the approaches that are employed for the
production of cultivated crops, because wild species grow in any disturbed site.
According to Pfeiffer (1970, p. 18): “weeds are weeds only from our human, egotis-
tical point of view, because they grow where we do not want them. In nature however,
they play an important and interesting role. They resist conditions that cultivated
plants cannot resist, such as drought, acidity, lack of humus, mineral deﬁciencies.
They are witnesses of man’s failure to master the soil, and they grow abundantly
where man has ‘missed the train’—they only indicate our errors and nature’s correc-
tions”. They are known to provide great biodiversity resources, including bird, ﬁsh,
and insect food, while hosting numerous insects in vital food chains. In fact, the loss
of weeds ultimately could mean the loss of agriculture, since they build soil humus,
while regulating its hydrology. Thus, conceptualizing weeds as indicators of soil
conditions could be used to spur their growth further, especially when these become
marketable as foods. Marginal lands, depleted soils and similar environmental condi-
tions, are feasible sites for an establishment of edible weeds, because they are adapt-
able to thrive during the early phase of secondary succession (Vidrine 2010). Farmers
Edible Weeds in Agricultural Landscapes as a Research Emphasis …
29
Fig. 1 Massive root system
of Mamou plant (Erythrina
herbacea), perennial plant
from remnant prairies of
southwestern Louisiana,
USA
interested in growing wild plants as food should observe what emerges from the seed
bankofmarginalsitesoftheirfarmsandsupportthegrowthofoneoralimitednumber
of weed species, while culling the remainder. This should enable growers to enhance
their knowledge about wild plants, including speciﬁc conditions needed by each one
to optimize its development.
Making predictions about weeds’ growth patterns in different farms or from one
growingseasontothenextremainschallengingyet,athoroughknowledgeofagrarian
landscapes is necessary to reconnect farms with ecosystems (Jackson and Jackson
2002). Growers’ conservation skills are essential for producing edible weeds, as
the farms become part of a new, agriculture paradigm that encourages landscape
rewilding (Monbiot 2022). Understanding what composition of species to expect on
tilled soils is a more predictable undertaking than learning weed phenology, as there
may be speciﬁc patterns about seed germination and dispersal within the soil seed
bank (Bhowmik 1997).
An identiﬁcation of weed species at their seedling stages is valuable for planning
the growing spaces for both cultivated plants and edible weeds. When seedling iden-
tiﬁcation is challenging, however, marking and letting patches of unknown seedlings
grow will facilitate their identiﬁcation. Enticing seeds to grow into edible plants in
tilled, annual crop production ﬁelds or in other spaces, where succession is reset to
habitats suitable for ruderal species, is always intertwined with weeding chores. After
all, weeding remains a keystone agricultural task, and adding edible weeds in agroe-
cosystems could add more work for farmers (Lampkin 1999). Yet, when growers
gain knowledge about edible weeds, they begin to welcome the yearly return of
certain species from one season to the next. At this point, selective weeding becomes
30
B. Borsari and M. F. Vidrine
necessary, and although this could reduce weeding efﬁciency as Yakovleva (2020)
explained, in return there will be extra crops available at harvest time.
In our opinion, the concurrent growth of edible weeds and cultivated crops is
feasible, if farmers relinquish the idea of maintaining manicured ﬁelds and shift away
from unrealistic designs and management utopias predicated by industrial agricul-
ture. Additional challenges beyond the ﬁelds’ esthetics could be: competing issues
among plants, transmission of pathogens, or insects transfer from weeds to cultivated
crops, or allelopathy (Batish et al. 2006; Gliessman et al. 2023). Therefore, seeking
balance while increasing agrobiodiversity, which boosts resilience and reduces these
and similar stressors, remains an important management component for handling
weeds (Altieri 1995; Borsari 2022).
The thought of letting weeds mature to a harvestable stage may evoke frightening
circumstances of increased hand-weeding chores. Thus, Assirelli and team (2022)
successfully employed a speciﬁc machine to control weed growth in a high-density
olive orchard in central Italy, suggesting that keeping pathways between rows mowed
is necessary to ensure the healthy growth of young trees, while reducing topsoil and
moisture losses that otherwise would occur when soils are kept free of vegetation.
Farms that grow perennial crops will rely on mowing and living mulched pathways,
while supplementing the maintenance of hard-to-reach spots with hand mowing
tools, or ad-hoc designed, small engine cultivators (Borsari et al. 2004). Also, ﬁeld
margins and hedgerows can support the growth of edible weeds in abundance as well
as natural habitats within and/or around farms (DeVore 2018). Managing these habi-
tats on a farm requires a committed relationship with the land, since management
decisions may have reverberating impacts on the entire local ecosystem. On agricul-
tural lands, where habitats are already fragmented, management decisions pertaining
to peripheral or marginal lands are signiﬁcant because these are often in riparian,
buffer zones, and protecting these will also protect water, soil, wildlife (Jackson and
Jackson 2002), and people.
Aside from variances in spatial conditions, the temporal divide among culti-
vated and wild crops offers additional possibilities for managing edible weeds.
For example, in a typical rotation of fast-growing crops, like radishes followed
by lettuce and kale, wilds plants can also be rotated in similar fashions (Lampkin
1999). Annual edible weeds peak in early spring or in early summer. Therefore,
farmers who welcome certain wild plants as food know when to expect them, hence,
growers should leave gaps in their rotation plans for one or more seasonal ﬂuxes of
wild edible weeds among their agronomic crops (Yakovleva 2020). Edible perennial
weeds that thrive on the edges of agricultural lands are common species that repro-
duceasexually,suchas:stingingnettle(Urticadioica),commonmilkweed(Asclepias
syriaca), sumac (Sumac spp.), and daylily (Lilium spp.). The harvesting and selective
weeding of these species occurs from the perimeter toward the center ﬁeld, because
this approach reduces excessive development. Additionally, this strategy minimizes
disturbance that, for some perennial species instead, stimulates growth. Harvesting
time is often a race against the summer temperatures and humidity to maintain the
produces’ quality, and thus, proﬁts from harvesting weeds for market should always
be weighed against produce losses.
Edible Weeds in Agricultural Landscapes as a Research Emphasis …
31
Few, well known edible weed seeds like saltwort (Salsola soda), shiso (Perilla
frutescens), candy-leaf (Stevia rebaudiana) and more, are marketed as herbs and can
be purchased from seed catalogs (Johnny’s Selected Seeds 2023; Seed Savers 2023).
Some of these commercial seeds are saved from wild populations, whereas others
are the outcome of domesticating efforts that augment wild plants’ desirable traits.
For example, cultivated dandelions tend to be less bitter than their feral counterparts,
and cultivated purslane grows more upright. Iconic species that growers ﬁrst got to
know in the wild and then transplanted to more convenient locations were stinging
nettles (Urtica spp.). These plants prefer wetter soils but tolerate a wide-range of
conditions and are easily propagated via stem cuttings, or through the splitting of
their wide, rhizomatous roots (Pfeiffer 1970). The cultivation of edible weeds can
be advantageous in minimizing health risks that their consumption may determine
because of an accumulation of pollutants and also in reducing risks for foodborne
diseases, due to limited predispositions to microbial contamination that wild plants
possess, when compared with agricultural crops (Baldi et al. 2022).
4.3
Research on Rewilding—A New Way to Look
at Agriculture and Ecological Economics
The term ‘weed’ has an entirely different context in the new science of rewilding—a
visionary concept, which is extensible to agroeconomic systems was developed and
proposed in several books by Wilson (2003, 2013, 2016). In rewilding, a ‘weed’ is
an exotic or non-native species, with ‘native’ plants being varyingly described as
‘precolonial’ or ‘naturalized early in colonial times.’ Debate, however, continues,
and we do not intend to resolve this in this chapter. Rather, we want to make readers
aware that current thinking about agriculture and food systems, as they both integrate
with water and petroleum resource usages, have grown to include an entirely new
ﬁeld, since Aldo Leopold’s groundbreaking role in the 1930s in habitat restoration,
by re-growing prairie on wasted agricultural lands, in an effort to depict a new
‘land ethic’ that integrates agriculture into natural habitats. Here our contention is
to recommend research on ‘native plants ordinarily considered weeds’ as not only
food and ﬁber for human and animal consumption but also as integral to stable, if
not sustainable, ecosystems that would support long-term agriculture; both currently
accepted crops and also new crops, especially new ‘native’ crops. The integration
of biodiversity in ﬁelds and around ﬁelds redoubles the potential for E. O. Wilson’s
vision of ‘half-Earth,’ as rewilded and integrated with humans and nature, becomes
a viable hypothesis. At present, we see this clearly documented by the recent work
of restorationists from England (Tree and Burrell 2023). The continued focus of
agriculture on the crops in vogue today is too susceptible to climatic and natural
changes occurring today, and thus, they cannot be the only options in changing the
face of agriculture to an extent that will be necessary to provide sustainable systems.
32
B. Borsari and M. F. Vidrine
5
Conclusion and Recommendations
Edible weeds in the human diet are expanding a new frontier for a development
of sustainable food systems. This emerging trend is cherished as a complemen-
tary strategy to efforts in sustainability, as present approaches to food production,
consumption and distribution by industrial agriculture remain unsustainable. Gordon
and team (2022) articulated a set of persuasive themes that should aid in shifting agri-
culture from consumptive to restorative, emphasizing landscape transformations that
veer farm design and management towards regaining complexity, biodiversity and
resilience. Within this framework, an integration of wild plants as food becomes ideal
for achieving the needed rehabilitation of landscapes and for realizing the improve-
ments that edible weeds can offer to human and planetary health. Therefore, farmers
should become proud to bring wild plants to market, despite chances of unavoid-
able criticism by some of their peers and consumers. The fact that customers may
scorn growers, when they see plants they identify as weeds for sale, could make
some farmers feel uncomfortable because this judgment could damage their profes-
sional image. In a recent report about unconventional plant-foods, Bellows and team
(2023) shed light on the amount of antioxidant phytochemicals in these foods and
their potential to increase dietary diversity and quality. From this study emerged the
need for micro- and macro-nutrients research on a larger spectrum of “wild foods”
together with needs for community nutrition education.
At the same time, the conﬁnes between weeds and agricultural crops, and/or
farming versus foraging is well marked and strongly maintained in U.S. afﬂuent
society. This has to do with the fact that edible weeds are considered famine
food and the only option for survival during hard times of crisis (Hjeltnes 2018).
According to Bexultanova and her collaborators (2022), interests in edible weeds
were spurred in the former USSR during World War II. Non-military circumstances,
such as environmental disasters leading to a food system collapse, constitute another
set of reasons that legitimize interests in edible, wild plants (Vorstenbosch et al.
2017). Nonetheless, we think that there is no obvious boundary between the contexts
presented here because wild and cultivated food crops befall along a broad range.
Consumers who engage on one side of this spectrum might feel more uncomfortable
to consider edible weeds as food, whereas others may regard wild plants with respect
and gratitude. However, most people maintain deeply rooted apprehensions about
consuming novel foods, and weeds although edible are no exception. This should not
be surprising though, because such hostility is embedded in western, afﬂuent culture,
including its language (Tompkins and Bird 1989). Therefore, promoting positive
experiences about weeds as foods is necessary, and this could occur through similar
marketing strategies as those that have been employed in persuading consumers to
eat insects-derived foods (Borsari 2023). Thus, various strategies justify needs for
future research about edible weeds that when added to overall recommendations
could more speciﬁcally focus on:
• Strengthening relationships between growers and consumers. This can be
achieved through surveys and marketing studies to assess consumers’ behavior.
Edible Weeds in Agricultural Landscapes as a Research Emphasis …
33
• Cooking demonstrations with edible weeds, including opportunities for degusta-
tion sampling at farmers’ markets, grocery stores, food cooperatives, and other
public sites, or events can be viable approaches in nutrition education and outreach
in support of edible weeds.
• Sharing of recipes and publications about using edible weeds as foods and
beverages.
• Subsidizingland‘rewilding’efforts,whichincludegrowingweedsforfood,ﬁbers,
as well as for clean air, drinkable water and healthy soils.
• Restoring vernacular knowledge of Indigenous uses of edible weeds through
informal education programs, but also through an establishment of eco-centric
education in schools, for every level of instruction.
• Leveling with the human population that food security is tenuously linked
to several ensuing conditions resulting from climate chaos, biodiversity loss,
hydrology changes, and more—the system is failing as critical tipping points
are being traversed.
This penultimate recommendation is substantiated by archeological evidence from
ancient agricultural centers in Europe and western Asia, suggesting that weeds’
evolutionary processes and selection by Neolithic farmers led to the domestication of
plants and their transformation into agronomic crops (Zohary et al. 2012). In essence,
all food crops have been domesticated from their wild ancestors exemplifying how
weeds became central to economies. Weeds, from other continents, like rice and
soybean, are examples of domesticated plants that have become ubiquitous; yet, their
production costs (social, economic, environmental) remain mostly unsustainable.
This gap requires agriculture to rely on government subsidies and crop insurance
for their continued survival. Thus, weeds remain a keystone farming theme, which
advocates for changes in agriculture and attitude in most peoples’ relationships with
food and co-existences with nature, in order to appreciate the beneﬁts that weeds can
bring to farming for conserving pollinators, beneﬁcial insects (Altieri and Whitcomb
1979), and ecosystems. Therefore, education remains pivotal to make all consumers
comprehend that wild plants have always been part of the human diet. This knowledge
may not affect consumers’ acceptance or rejection of non-crop plants, however,
increasing awareness continues to stand as a necessary task to be undertaken in
efforts to veer agriculture towards sustainability.
The latter recommendation has been treated in part in previous chapters of ours
(Borsari and Vidrine 2022, 2023). Preparation for adapting to climate change requires
open-minded education across a variety of disciplines, including agriculture, ecology,
humanities, and certainly, history. Most importantly, this public awareness about
edible weeds needs to be inclusive of Indigenous knowledges and wisdom (Bellows
et al. 2023), while expanding education efforts about an ethic, supportive of wild
foods ecologies.
In sum, edible weeds can become desirable for swerving peoples’ dietary habits a
step closer toward new gastronomic boundaries, located outside established norms,
but not as far as generally thought. We have options of achieving sustainability
34
B. Borsari and M. F. Vidrine
through edible weeds. Yet, these will be realized through land trusts and a mobiliza-
tion of citizens’ organizations that will make these changes occur. An approach,
which is inclusive of non-crop plants in agriculture possesses tangible beneﬁts
for both human and planetary health. It showcases possibilities and prospects for
achieving sustainability at the food system level, and beyond. We close with the
notion that ‘native’ plants or ‘native weeds,’ as they may be referred to by general
agriculturalists, couple potential research interests in growing weeds for food and
ﬁber with growing weeds to sustain natural habitats, which embrace agricultural
systems as we know them today and potentially extend their lifetimes.
References
Allen CM, Allen AW, Winters HH (2005) Edible plants of the Gulf South. Allen’s Native Ventures,
LLC, Pitkins, LA.
Altieri MA, Whitcomb WH (1979) The potential use of weeds in the manipulation of beneﬁcial
insects. HortScience 14(1):12–18
Altieri MA (1995) Agroecology: the science of sustainable agriculture. Westview Press Inc.,
Boulder, CO
Assirelli A, Ciaccia C, Giorgi V, Zucchini M, Neri D, Lodolini EM (2022) An alternative tool for
intra-row weed control in a high-density Olive Orchard. Agronomy 12:605. https://doi.org/10.
3390/agronomy12030605
Aswani S, Lemahieu A, Sauer WHH (2018) Global trends of local ecological knowledge and future
implications. PLoS ONE 13(4):e0195440. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0195440
Baldi A, Bruschi P, Campeggi S, Egea T, Rivera D, Obón C, Lenzi A (2022) The renaissance of
wild food plants: insights from Tuscany (Italy). Foods 11:300. https://doi.org/10.3390/foods1
1030300
Batish DR, Singh HP, Kohli RK, Dawra GP (2006) Potential of allelopathy and allelochemicals for
weed management. In: Singh HP, Batish DR, Kohli RH (eds) Handbook of sustainable weed
management. Haworth Press, New York, pp 220–267
Bellows AC, Raj S, Pitstick E, Potteiger MR, Diemont SAW (2023) Foraging wild edibles: dietary
diversity in expanded food systems. Nutrients 15:4630. https://doi.org/10.3390/nu15214630
Bexultanova G, Prakofjewa J, Sartori M, Kalle R, Pieroni A, Sõukand R (2022) Promotion of wild
food plant use diversity in the soviet union, 1922–1991. Plants 11:2670. https://doi.org/10.3390/
plants11202670
Bhowmik P (1997) Weed biology: importance to weed management. Weed Sci 45(3):349–356.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0043174500092973
Borsari B (2022) Agrobiodiversity as necessary standard for the design and management of sustain-
able farming systems. Planta Tropika J Agro Sci 10(1):93–101. https://doi.org/10.18196/pt.
v10i1.14105
Borsari B, Elder T, Reynolds T (2004) Assessing the educational opportunities from a solar powered
cultivator at slippery rock university of Pennsylvania. Int J Sustain High Educ 5(2):190–198.
https://doi.org/10.1108/14676370410526260
Borsari B, DeGrazia E (2015) Bruno’s Garden. North Dakota Q 80(3):64–82
Borsari B, Kunnas J (2020) Agriculture production and consumption. In: Leal Filho W, Azul AM,
Brandli L, özuyar PG, Wall T (eds) Responsible consumption and production: encyclopedia
of the UN sustainable development goals. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
95726-5_78
Borsari B, Vidrine MF (2022) Planetary health begins on campus: enhancing students’ well-being
and health through prairie habitat restoration. In: Leal Filho W (eds) Handbook of human and
Edible Weeds in Agricultural Landscapes as a Research Emphasis …
35
planetary health: climate change management. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
031-09879-6_14
Borsari B, Vidrine MF (2023) Envisioning prairies as curricular focus for climate change education.
In: Leal Filho W, Sima M, Lange Salvia A, Kovaleva M, Manolas E (eds) University initiatives
on climate change education and research. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-
25960-9_56-1
Borsari B (2023) Bread from bugs and the signiﬁcance of employing insect foods in
the human diet. In: Kevany K, Prosperi P (eds) Routledge handbook of sustain-
able diets. ISBN: 9781032004860. https://www.routledge.com/Routledge-Handbook-of-Sustai
nable-Diets/Kevany-prosperi/p/book/9781032004860
Carlberg Z (2014) Sustainable weed management for small and medium-scale farms. National
Center for Appropriate Technology. Available at: https://attra.ncat.org/publication/sustainable-
weed-management-for-small-and-medium-sized-farms/
Cocannauer JA (1980) Weeds guardians of the soil. The Devin-Adair Company, Old Greenwich,
Connecticut
Cruz-Garcia GS (2017) Management and motivations to manage “Wild” food plants: a case study
in a mestizo village in the amazon deforestation frontier. Front Ecol Evol 5:127. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fevo.2017.00127
DeVore B (2018) Wildly successful farming: sustainability and the new agricultural land ethic. The
University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI. ISBN: 9780299318802
Duke JA (1992) Handbook of edible weeds. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, USA
Edgeworth M (2023) Landscape. In: Wallenhorst N, Wulf C (eds) Handbook of the anthropocene.
Springer, Cham, pp 151–155. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-25910-4-24
Ferguson RS, Lovell ST (2017) Livelihood diversity on US permaculture farms. Agroecol Sustain
Food Syst 41(6):588–613
FerrarioV(2021)Learningfromagriculturalheritage?lessonsofsustainabilityfromItalian“Coltura
Promiscua.” Sustainability 13:8879. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13168879
Fritz GJ (2019) Feeding cahokia. Early agriculture in the North American heartland. The University
of Alabama Press. Tuscaloosa, AL.
Fukuoka M (1985) Natural way of farming: the theory and practice of green philosophy. Japan
Publications Inc., Tokyo and New York
Gliessman SR, Méndez EV, Izzo VM, Engels EW, Gerlicz A (2023) Agroecology. Leading the
transformation to a just and sustainable food system, 4th edn. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis
Group, Boca Raton, FL
Gliessman S (2015) Agroecology. The ecology of sustainable food systems, 3rd edn. CRC Press,
Taylor & Francis Group, Boca Raton, FL
Gordon E, Davila F, Riedy C (2022) Transforming landscapes and mindscapes through regenerative
agriculture. Agric Hum Values 39:809–826. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10460-021-10276-0
Hirsh SM, Mabry CM, Schulte LA, Liebman M (2013) Diversifying agricultural catchments by
incorporating tallgrass prairie buffer strips. Ecol Restor 31(2):201–211. https://doi.org/10.3368/
er.31.2.201
Hjeltnes G (2018) Supplies under pressure: Survival in a fully rationed society: experiences, cases
and innovation in rural and urban regions in occupied Norway. In: Tönsmeyer T, Haslinger
P, Laba A (eds) Coping with hunger and shortage under german occupation in World War II.
Palgrave Macmillan, Cham, Switzerland, pp 61–82
Huner JV (1994) Freshwater crayﬁsh aquaculture in North America: families Astacidae,
Cambaridae, and Parastacidaea. The Haworth Press (Food Products Press), Binghamton, NY.
ISBN: 1-56022-039-2
Jackson DL, Jackson LL (eds) (2002) The farm as natural habitat: reconnecting food systems with
ecosystems. Island Press, Washington, D.C.
Johnny’s Selected Seeds (2023) Catalog. Available at: https://www.johnnyseeds.com/
Lampkin N (1999) Organic farming. Farming Press, Tonbridge TN9 1RW, United Kingdom. ISBN:
0-85236-191-2
36
B. Borsari and M. F. Vidrine
Lymbery P (2022) Sixty harvests left: how to reach a nature-friendly future. Bloomsbury Publishing,
London, UK
Magdoff F, Van Es H (2009) Building soils for better crops: sustainable soil management, 3rd edn.
SARE Outreach Publications, Brentwood, MD
Monbiot G (2022) Regenesis: feeding the world without devouring the planet. Penguin Books,
London, UK
Orsini F, Kahane R, Nono-Womdim R, Gianquinto G (2013) Urban agriculture in the developing
world: a review. Agron Sustain Dev 33(4):695–720. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13593-013-0143-z
Patten ML (2004) Understanding research methods. An overview of the essentials, 4th edn. Pyrczak
Publishing. ISBN 1-884585-52-3
Pfeiffer EE (1970) Weeds and what they tells. Bio-Dynamic Farming and gardening Association
Inc., Kimberton, PA
Pickett CH, Bugg RK (1998) Enhancing biological control: habitat management to promote natural
enemies of agricultural pests. University of California, Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA
Provenza F, Pringle H, Revell D, Bray N, Hines C, Teague R, Steffens T, Barnes M (2013) Complex
creative systems: principles, processes, and practices of transformation. Rangelands 35(5):6–13
Putnam AR, DeFrank J, Barnes JP (1983) Exploitation of allelopathy for weed control in annual
and perennial cropping systems. J Chem Ecol 9(8):1001–1010
Rapoport EH, Raffaele E, Ghermandi L, Margutti L (1995) Edible weeds: a scarcely used resource.
Bull Ecol Soc Am 76(3):163–166
Sanchez-Bel P, Romojaro A, Egea I, Pretel MT (2015) Wild edible plants as potential antioxidant or
nutritional supplements for beverages minimally processed. LWT Food Sci Technol 62:830–837.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lwt.2014.06.017
Seed Savers (2023) On-line catalog. Available at: https://indd.adobe.com/view/f7969a45-0869-
406c-9429-d8292ecf7ced
Smith TM, Smith RL (2014) Elements of ecology, 9th edn. Pearson, NJ
Smith R (2020) Crawﬁsh contribute millions to Louisiana ag economy. Crawﬁsh market suffers
under COVID-19. Available at: https://www.farmprogress.com/management/crawﬁsh-contri
bute-millions-to-louisiana-ag-economy
Soule JD, Piper JK (1991) Farming in nature’s image: an ecological approach to agriculture. Island
Press, Washington, D.C.
Stanek E, Lovell ST, Reisner A (2019) Designing multifunctional woody polycultures according to
landowner preferences in Central Illinois. Agrofor Syst 93(6):2293–2311
Stout MJ, Hummel NA, Lanka S, Hamm JC, Mészáros A, McClain WR, Frey MJ, Barbee JC (2011)
Making rice ﬁelds safe for crawﬁsh. Louisiana Agric 54(3):13
Tallamy DW (2020) Nature’s best hope: a new approach to conservation that starts in your Yard.
Timber Press, Portland, Oregon
Tan Chua-Barcelo R (2014) Ethno-botanical survey of edible wild fruits in Benguet, Cordillera
administrative region, the Philippines. Asian Pac J Trop Biomed 4(Suppl 1):S525–S538. https://
doi.org/10.12980/APJTB.4.201414B36
Tompkins P, Bird C (1989) Secrets of the soil. New Age Solutions for Restoring our Planet. Harper &
Row, New York
Tree I, Burrell C (2023) The book of wilding: a practical guide to rewilding big and small.
Bloomsbury Publishing, London, UK
Turner NJ, Łuczaj LJ, Migliorini P, Pieroni A, Dreon AL, Sacchetti LE, Paoletti MG (2011) Edible
and tended wild plants, traditional ecological knowledge and agroecology. Crit Rev Plant Sci
30(1–2):198–225. https://doi.org/10.1080/07352689.2011.554492
Vidrine MF, Fontenot WR, Allen CM, Borsari B, Allain L (2001) Prairie cajuns and the cajun
prairie: a history. In: Bernstein NP, Ostrander LJ (eds) Proceedings of the 17th North American
prairie conference. Seeds for the future; roots of the past. North Iowa Area Community College,
Mason City, Iowa, pp 220–224
Vidrine MF (2010) The Cajun Prairie: a natural history. Malcolm F. Vidrine. Eunice, Louisiana
Edible Weeds in Agricultural Landscapes as a Research Emphasis …
37
Vorstenbosch T, de Zwarte I, Duistermaat L, van Andel T (2017) Famine food of vegetal origin
consumed in the Netherlands during World War II. J Ethnobiol Ethnomed 13:63
Weil RR, Brady NC (2017) The nature and properties of soils. 15th edn. Pearson, NJ
Wilson EO (2003) The future of life. Vintage Books, New York
Wilson EO (2013) The social conquest of earth. Liveright, New York
Wilson RG (1988) Biology of weed seeds in the soil. In: Altieri M, Liebman M (eds) Weed
management in agroecosystems: ecological approaches. CRC Press, Inc., Boca Raton, FL
Wilson EO (2016) Half-earth: our planet’s ﬁght for Life. Liveright/W.W. Norton, New York. ISBN:
978-1-63149-082-8
WortmanSE,LindquistJL,HarrMJ,FrancisCA(2010)Increasedweeddiversity,densityandabove-
ground biomass in long-term organic crop rotations. Renew Agric Food Syst 25(4):281–295.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S174217051000030X
Xie T, Liu W, Anderson BD, Liu X, Gray GC (2017) A system dynamics approach to understanding
the one Health concept. PLoSONE 12(9):e0184430. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.018
4430
Yakovleva T (2020) Edible Weeds on Farms. Northeast Farmer’s Guide to Self-Growing Vegetables.
SARE Northeast. Available at: https://northeast.sare.org/resources/edible-weeds-on-farms/
Zhang L, Zhang Y, Pei S, Geng P, Wang C, Yuhua W (2015) Ethnobotanical survey of medicinal
dietary plants used by the Naxi People in Lijiang Area, Northwest Yunnan, China. J Ethnobiol
Ethnomed 11:40. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13002-015-0030-6
Zohary D, Hopf M, Weiss E (2012) Domestication of plants in the old world, 4th edn. Oxford
University Press, London
Transitioning to a Sustainable Smart
Agriculture Using Deep Machine
Learning Techniques: The Case
of a Greek Project
Aristea Kounani, Alkiviadis Tsimpiris, and Dimitrios Varsamis
Abstract In these times of global crisis, agriculture has been confronted with many
challenges that must be met in order to serve a rapidly expanding global population
and contribute to the sustainability of the planet. Hence, Sustainable Smart Agri-
culture could provide better and faster solutions to the challenges that need to be
addressed. The concept of smart agriculture refers to the use of modern informa-
tion and communication technologies in agricultural production. The purpose of
this chapter is to demonstrate how to transition to a smart, sustainable agriculture
by using deep machine learning techniques. Additionally this chapter discusses a
research effort and an initiative developed by International Hellenic University, a
Greek university located in a rural area. A web service based on deep machine
learning has been developed by the research team to monitor crops and promote
agricultural sustainability. Using drone images of various crops at different develop-
mental stages, models were trained to diagnose and treat affected plants as quickly
as possible. Plant health is improved while avoiding the use of pesticides and fertil-
izers that cause numerous environmental issues, such as eutrophication and water
pollution, as well as posing a health threat to humans. The web-based application
enables Greek farmers to upload a picture of their crops and receive a prediction for
decision-making. Consequently, agricultural yields are expected to increase, while
transitioning to sustainable smart agriculture is expected to be promoted.
Keywords Sustainable smart agriculture · Deep machine learning · Plant disease
detection · Convolutional neural networks
A. Kounani (B)
Department of Agriculture, Program of Agricultural Economics & Enterpreneurship International
Hellenic University, P. O. box 141, 57400 Thessaloniki, Greece
e-mail: akounani@yahoo.gr
A. Tsimpiris · D. Varsamis
Department of Informatics, Computer and Telecommunications Engineering International
Hellenic University, Terma Magnisias, 62124 Serres, Greece
e-mail: atsimpiris@ihu.gr
D. Varsamis
e-mail: dvarsam@ihu.gr
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_3
39
40
A. Kounani et al.
1
Introduction
In recent years, the increase in per capita consumption of products has been one
of the main drivers of unpredictable environmental challenges, as a consequence of
the continuous increase in the needs for agricultural products of an ever-growing
global population (Berbel and Posadillo 2018). Thus, the agricultural sector needs
to increase global agricultural production by about 50% to meet the demands of a
world population expected to reach 10 billion by 2050 (FAO 2017). Nevertheless,
the production of increasingly nutritious and safe food not only does require more
arable land and inputs, such as water and energy, but also results in the depletion
of natural resources (Berkum and Dengerink 2019). Besides that, food production
is adversely affected by plant pests and diseases, which compromise the quality of
crops and negatively affect their productivity.
In many cases, plant pests and diseases have become a global threat to some crops,
making them a major concern for the agricultural sector (Arsenovic et al. 2019).
Chemical control can be a temporary solution, but may not be beneﬁcial in the long
run. Agrochemicals can have adverse effects on the crop, while at the same time they
can pose a health risk to farmers and rural residents alike (Panchal et al. 2021). Thus,
plant pathologists recommend continuous monitoring of the crop, as well as quick
and accurate diagnosis as a management and control measure, in order to minimize
production losses and maintain the viability of the crop (Abade et al. 2021). Conse-
quently, agriculture faces an increased challenge in identifying the symptoms of pests
and diseases that affect crops (Mohanty et al. 2016; Abade et al. 2021). In order to
counter these threats, agriculture must reduce pesticide and insecticide use (Toda and
Okura 2019), as well as promote sustainability in the sector. The Smart Sustainable
Agriculture is an initiative that could provide solutions to these challenges. By using
modern technologies, it is possible to increase the quantity of production as well as
the quality, while at the same time minimizing environmental impact and maximizing
the use of resources (Tao et al. 2021). The concept of smart sustainable agriculture
refers to the utilization of technology to improve the sustainability of the agricultural
industry, including the Internet of Things, big data analytics, smart supply chains,
sensors, robotics, artiﬁcial intelligence, and block chain (Jararweh et al. 2023).
Recent years have seen the development of a variety of diagnostic methods aimed
at preventing large losses in agricultural production. A standard approach to the
detection of infestations and the identiﬁcation of crop pests and diseases has tradi-
tionally relied on human intervention through visual inspection (Toda and Okura
2019), which is usually conducted after extensive damage has been done to the
crop (Bhatia et al. 2019). In today’ s technology-driven world, this method is often
combined or replaced by other techniques, such as machine learning (ML), deep
machine learning (DML), convolutional neural networks (CNN) etc., which are very
effective ways to detect plant pests and diseases. A number of image-based diag-
nostic methods have been introduced into practice as a result of the advancements in
technology and signiﬁcant cost reductions in digital imaging (West et al. 2003).
Transitioning to a Sustainable Smart Agriculture Using Deep Machine …
41
The goal of this chapter is to demonstrate how to transition to a smart, sustain-
able agriculture model. The case study describes a project that the Department
of Computer, Informatics, and Telecommunications Engineering of International
Hellenic University has developed in Serres, a rural area of Greece. Through this
project, the research team developed a new application and service for monitoring
and improving crops using DML. Drone images of different plants at different devel-
opmental stages were collected in order to train models in diagnosing affected plants
as effectively as possible, resulting in improved plant health. In this way, pesti-
cides and insecticides are reduced in agriculture, thus enhancing sustainability. In
this regard, the proposed system will prove useful to farmers as it enables them
to diagnose crop infestations in real time and support their decision to make more
rational use of pesticides as and when it is really necessary, and thus stop unneces-
sary spraying in cases where infestations are at very low levels or are not going to
cause signiﬁcant losses in the crop yield. Meanwhile, the system provides scientiﬁc
community, government agencies, and businesses with information on the spread of
crop pests and diseases at a regional level. Moreover, this research project contributes
to the advancement of sustainability research by maximizing the accuracy of correct
diagnosis, using automated methods for identifying plant pests and diseases, which
reduce input costs and increase crop yields.
2
Literature Review
2.1
Smart Sustainable Agriculture
Agricultural production and food systems have been disproportionately vulnerable
to a number of environmental challenges over the past few decades. The effects of
climate change events, the increased cost of energy, the shortage of arable land and
restricted water resources, as well as the continuing outﬂow of farmers, increase
the risk to global and national food security (Fu et al. 2021; O’Shaughnessy et al.
2021). Multiple governments have established national policies to address these
multifaceted challenges to ensure long-term sustainability and resilience of the agri-
cultural sector. Through the implementation of smart systems, this concept seeks
to provide solutions based on data from agricultural production. Additionally, to
ensure national security and protect natural resources, sustainable agriculture must
be promoted. The key objective is to emphasize on productivity enhancing tech-
nologies, such as mechanization and digitized farming, as critical to promoting agri-
cultural and climate-smart technologies and preventing environmental degradation
(Rasul 2021; Sanders et al. 2022; Lee and Kim 2022). Automatic irrigating systems
for each plot of land according to its particular characteristics and the weather fore-
cast, drones that monitor hundreds of acres to assess the growth and health of crops,
smart sensors that help detect pest and disease infestations in time. These are just
42
A. Kounani et al.
some of the advantages of smart agriculture, which can help eliminate hunger and
ensure a sustainable future (Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldu 2018).
As a result of utilizing a sustainable agriculture approach, farmers ensure the food
they produce for future generations without compromising the quality of the food
they are producing for the current generation (Dhanaraju et al. 2022). Combining
modern technology with eco-friendly practices, smart farming can improve agricul-
ture, increasing the quantity as well as quality of nutrition of food produced (O’Grady
and O’Hare 2017; Ramdinthara and Bala 2020).
Several advanced technologies have already been used in various agriculture prac-
tices in the past, including tillage, seedling, fertilization, weed detection, irrigation,
spraying pesticides, harvesting etc. Smart agriculture is an important step in global
agriculture history (Fawzy and El-Ramady 2022). There has been a dramatic change
in agriculture due to new technological developments that have changed the tradi-
tional way of farming and transformed conventional methods into a technique known
as the Internet of Things (Ramdinthara and Bala 2020). Through the combination of
satellite imagery and information from ground sensors, these systems enable farmers
to make informed decisions about how, when, and where to allocate resources. A fact
thatcontributestoachievingbettereconomicandecologicalresults(BachandMauser
2018). With the advent of this technology, agriculture has undergone a signiﬁcant
transformation that has the potential to lead to more accurate and efﬁcient farming.
Undoubtedly, proper automation of the cultivation process helps optimize crop
yield and ensure perpetual productivity and sustainability. There is a strong link
between increased productivity and economic growth. Thus, the application of smart
agriculture techniques in the agricultural sector can strengthen the development of
the economy in many countries (Elnemr 2019).
2.2
Application of Convolutional Neural Networks
in Sustainable Agriculture
Today, agriculture is in the early days of another revolution, centered on data and
connectivity. Artiﬁcial intelligence, analytics, connected sensors and other technolo-
gies could further increase yields, improve efﬁciency of water and other inputs, and
promote sustainability and resilience in crops and livestock. These are just some
of the beneﬁts of smart agriculture, which can help eradicate hunger and ensure a
sustainable future (Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldu 2018).
The use of CNNs for processing aerial photographs of vegetation can be success-
fully applied to various precision agriculture applications (Mate et al. 2016),
including:
• Weed extraction from ﬁelds using data obtained from robots with greater than
90% accuracy, as well as ﬂower detection to estimate ﬂowering intensity to
predict yields with a detection accuracy of 67–94% (depending on the plants
photographed) (Dias et al. 2018),
Transitioning to a Sustainable Smart Agriculture Using Deep Machine …
43
• Estimating yields from newly developing fruits, using multi-level perceptrons and
CNNs (Bargoti and Underwood 2017),
• IdentiﬁcationofvegetationfromGaofen-2remotesensingimages,whichprovides
accuracy of 89–90% (Zhang et al. 2018),
• Selection of agricultural land characteristics,
• Pests and diseases detection with high accuracy rates (96%) (Lin et al. 2019;
Ganchenko and Doudkin 2019).
In recent years, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), as a machine learning
approach, represent a ﬂexible approach to assimilate large amounts of heterogeneous
data and support reliable predictions of uncertain or complex phenomena (Good-
fellow et al. 2016). Thus, they show excellent results in the classiﬁcation of many
images, which allows researchers to improve the accuracy of classiﬁcations of plant
pests and diseases (Brahimi et al. 2018). Thus, systems that detect and identify plant
pests and diseases using CNN architectures have been proposed and are continuously
being proposed. In these systems, affected plant parts, e.g. leaf, can be captured in
order to detect and identify pests and diseases. The systems also have the ability to
generate heat maps, which provide information about the spread of disease in an area
as well as facilitate data analysis (Bhatia et al. 2019).
Convolutional Neural Networks are trained using images of healthy plants and
infected plants as inputs. The color or pattern information of the images triggers the
neuronsintheCNN.Sinceimagesofinfectedplantscontainfeaturesthatdifferentiate
them from those of healthy plants, it is possible to distinguish these features based on
patterns, colors, infection status, plant location, etc. Thus, when an image is imported,
these features are examined to determine whether the plant is healthy or affected by
a pest or a disease (Udawant and Srinath 2019).
2.3
State of the Art
In the last decade, several studies have been conducted using deep machine learning
techniques to automate the diagnosis of plant pests and diseases with high accu-
racy and validity (Arivazhagan and VinethLigi 2018). A few of them are mentioned
below indicatively. Therefore, Sladojevic et al. (2016) applied CNNs for the classi-
ﬁcation of plant diseases by collecting a dataset from publicly available images on
the Internet. Brahimi et al. (2017) classiﬁed tomato diseases using CNNs, based on
leaf images from PlantVillage’s public dataset. Lu et al. (2017) investigated the use
of CNNs to classify rice diseases. Arivazhagan and VinethLigi (2018) proposed an
automated method for identifying mango leaf diseases. Ale et al. (2019) introduced
a transfer learning technique based on densely connected convolutional networks
(DenseNet) to detect plant diseases. Arsenovic et al. (2019) developed a new dataset
containing real-life leaf images at different angles and in various weather conditions.
Richey et al. (2020) developed a mobile application-based technique for the detec-
tion and classiﬁcation of diseases in maize crops. Chohan et al. (2020) proposed
44
A. Kounani et al.
a model based on CNNs, using DL capabilities, for automatic detection of plant
diseases. Bedi and Gole (2021) proposed a new hybrid model for the automatic
detection of plant diseases that infect the leaves of peach plants using the Convo-
lutional Autoencoder-CAE network. Nagaraj et al. (2023) used the Plant Village
Dataset and the MobileNetV2 architecture to develop a CNN-based framework for
detecting pest-borne diseases on tomato leaves. Mahadevan et al. (2024) provided an
introduction to Rice Plant leaf blight diagnosis and symptoms, using conventional
methods to test real-time images. Rai and Pahuja’s (2024) research explored a real-
time, effective method for segmenting and detecting NLB diseases in maize crops
using a deep learning-based Attention U-Net model. Saraswat et al. (2024) exam-
ined optimistic solutions to detect fungus and bacteria in plants to improve their
health and freshness, using CNN, DL, artiﬁcial neural networks, ML, clustering and
deterministic probability-based data fusion.
Undoubtedly recent years have seen extensive research to identify and classify
plant pests and diseases (i.e., multiple diseases and pests that affect one plant, or a
single pest or disease that affects a number of plants) using advanced techniques like
CNNs which requires little or no pre-processing of the images.
3
The Case of the Greek Project
During the years 2022 and 2023, a group of academics and researchers from the
Department of Computer, Informatics, and Telecommunications Engineering of
International Hellenic University in Serres, a rural region of Northern Greece, initi-
ated a project. Among the key objectives of this project was the development of new
applications and services based on DML to monitor and improve crops cultivation
and yields. To promote sustainable practices in agriculture, the project intends to
reduce unnecessary spraying interventions and only use pesticides and insecticides
when necessary. Further, the project is intended to provide, implement, and utilize
smart agriculture techniques and solutions. The concept of Smart Agriculture refers
to the application of modern Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) in
the agricultural sector, thus it has the potential to provide solutions to the challenges
facing farmers today.
3.1
Short Description
In particular, this project developed innovative DML applications and models for
crop path estimation with image data. An online application has been developed
that allow the farmer to upload a photo taken by ones mobile phone and receive
as a response from the trained DL model the corresponding prediction towards the
growth and health of the crop for decision-making. For the proposed application,
the design of the appropriate algorithm and the development of relevant software
Transitioning to a Sustainable Smart Agriculture Using Deep Machine …
45
were required for the automatic estimation of the course of the crops from their
digital image. In addition, an asynchronous training platform was developed for
remote training of farmers on new technologies for sustainable crops, rational use of
pesticides-fertilizers and maintenance of machinery, sprayers, etc. In order to train
models to diagnose and treat affected plants as quickly as possible, drone images
of different crops were collected at different plant growth stages, as well as in ﬁeld
pictures taken by an agronomist, resulting in improved plant health while minimizing
the use of pesticides and fertilizers. As a result, through an online application, Greek
farmers can upload a photo of their crop and receive a prediction for decision-making
from the trained deep learning model. Thus, agricultural yields will increase on the
one hand, and the transition to sustainable smart agriculture will be promoted on the
other hand.
3.2
Project Implementation Methodology—Description
of Work Units
The part of the application dealing with the visual recognition of crop condition
utilized Deep Learning models such as GoogleNet and Resnet, along with a CNN
(Convolutional Neural Network) model. In the context of this project, these models
were trained and adapted to the environment and conditions of the problems it was
tasked with solving. A two-phase development process was followed when devel-
oping the software. Initially, a CNN model was developed using mathematical devel-
opment tools (proediting), and in the second phase, a web application was developed
to integrate these tools and provide access to them to registered users.
A schematic view of the implementation stages of the entire project is shown in
Fig. 1, while a more detailed description is provided in the following section.
1st Stage:  
Record requirements 
analysis
2nd Stage:
Architecture, 
technology 
framework and 
system management
3rd Stage: 
Selection, initial 
training and 
adaptation of 
algorithms to 
implement deep 
learning models
4th Stage: 
Generating 
additional training 
data and retraining 
and optimizing deep 
learning algorithms
5th Stage: 
Integrating DML 
models into a web 
application and 
adding automation 
features
web 
application
Fig. 1 Schematic illustration of project stages
46
A. Kounani et al.
1st Stage: Record requirements analysis
In order to ensure that the project is implemented correctly, initial mapping and
analysis of the project’s overall requirements, primarily involving the development
and operation of the systems under development, the needs of the end users, as well
as the framework for simulated testing of the results were conducted. Furthermore,
the acquisition of photographic material for the development and evolution of DML
algorithms and models were examined in light of issues and problems related to
real content acquisition. It was also investigated whether material can be used as
a “testbed” for the reliability control of algorithms for DML models designed ML
(Fig. 2).
2nd Stage: Architecture, technology framework and system management
The task involved designing and deﬁning a technological work framework that served
as the basis for software development, developing deep learning models, algorithms
for processing and categorization, asynchronous training systems, and integrating
and integrating all of these components. Figure 3 depicts the architecture of how a
typical CNN is structured as a sequence of stages (Liu et al. 2019).
In addition, software control tools (white box and black box techniques) were
deﬁned. Finally, the architecture for collecting, storing, processing, and presenting
the data were developed.
Fig. 2 Work organizing plan
Fig. 3 CNN’s structure (Based on Liu et al. 2019)
Transitioning to a Sustainable Smart Agriculture Using Deep Machine …
47
3rd Stage: selection, initial training and adaptation of algorithms to implement DL
models
As part of the crop image classiﬁcation component of the application, DML tech-
niques were used with CNN models. These models were applied to the categorization
of images, from a vast database of images, which could be classiﬁed into thousands
of categories and relate to various types of content. An evaluation of CNN models
parameterized in the problem environment, such as Google Net and ResNet, was
carried out. Meanwhile, a new CNN model with a shallower depth than previously
known models was developed by the project team and parameterized so that its
performance is comparable to or even better than the well-known pre-trained models.
The appropriate conﬁguration and assignment of roles was carried out to the selected
users after a software asynchronous training platform (e.g. Moodle, Open eclass) was
selected and installed on a server. The responsible party also developed modules with
educational and informational material pertaining to the rational use of pesticides
and fertilizers as well as the correct use of spraying equipment.
4th Stage: Generating additional training data and retraining and optimizing deep
learning algorithms
In order to achieve consistently high accuracy of the CNN model regardless of
lighting conditions, viewing angle and distance, a larger and heterogeneous training
dataset consisting of thousands of images was created to train the system. To capture
the images of the crops, a drone was used that was directed to certain heights in
order to capture the images from different angles and distances. Images were also
taken of the same crops with both smart mobile device cameras and a still camera.
Each image was properly characterized by an agronomist for the growth stage and
category of the crop as well as the identiﬁcation and identiﬁcation of the enemies and
diseases that have attacked the cultivated plants. Using the extended learning data,
the algorithms that the previous stages arrived at were retrained and optimized. The
end result was the trained algorithms and deep learning model used to complete a
uniﬁed web application and lead to the complete project solution. The installation of
an open software asynchronous education platform and enrichment with appropriate
content was also carried out.
5th Stage: Integrating DML models into a web application and adding automation
features-Web application development and integration of the deep machine learning
model as well as its operation as a web service
It involved developing a web application (Fig. 4) that communicates with a DML
model that has been developed, parameterized, and trained on thousands of crops of
photographs. According to the rights that have been assigned to the user, the web
application identiﬁes him and allows him to access the appropriate features.
The communication of the web application with the asynchronous training plat-
form was conducted by integrating automatic communication capabilities with users
and agronomists with the web application. A deep machine learning model and
related software were designed and developed, and the results were disseminated
48
A. Kounani et al.
Fig. 4 The web application of the project
to the scientiﬁc community through publications. It is important to convey the key
messages and outcomes of the project during and after its completion, as well as
to highlight its positive impacts. The results were disseminated, communicated, and
publicized primarily through the website and social media presence, as well as third
party websites.
3.3
Results
Among the outcomes of the project was the development of applications and models
for crop path estimation based on deep machine learning algorithms. An online
application was developed that allows farmers to upload photos of their crops and
receive a response from the trained DL model with the corresponding prediction for
decision making. As a result, they are able to make an informed decision regarding
the methods to be employed in order to deal with any threats to their crops. This
prevents unnecessary spraying interventions and the use of pesticides and insecticides
is restricted to when necessary, in order to promote sustainable agricultural practices.
Figure 5 illustrates how the web service identiﬁes an infested or a healthy plant
and determines the nature of the infestation. Moreover, Figs. 6, 7 and 8 illustrate the
step-by-step process of using the application by farmers. This application required
the design of an appropriate algorithm and the development of relevant software for
the automatic assessment of the progress of crops based on the digital images of the
crops.
Transitioning to a Sustainable Smart Agriculture Using Deep Machine …
49
Fig. 5 A schematic illustration of the web service used to identify the pest Aphis Gossypii on
cotton leaves
Fig. 6 Assessment
application
Fig. 7 Uploading a picture
from an affected plant to the
web service
50
A. Kounani et al.
Fig. 8 Illustration of disease
or pest estimation of the web
service
Meanwhile, the outcome of the project was the creation of an asynchronous
training platform for training farmers remotely about new technologies for sustain-
able crops, rational use of pesticides and fertilizers, machinery maintenance, and
sprayer maintenance. In order to determine the best solution, results are compared.
By automating crop progress information, a number of advantages will be provided
to the farmer and business, including faster and more efﬁcient operation throughout
the entire crop process, as well as continuous training and information via an
asynchronous platform education platform.
A few highlights of the project’s beneﬁts and outcomes are listed below:
• The application automatically updates the crop status upon taking a photo.
• There is a user proﬁle and a crop proﬁle for each crop
• There is a record of the history of each crop available to the agronomist for a more
informed opinion. In addition, photos taken by a drone or from a mobile device
can reduce the transition period from one crop to another.
• Using the system will minimize the possibility of a wrong diagnosis by the
agronomist due to the system’s training, and it will provide a ﬁrst estimate to
the agronomist. This will increase the company’s clientele.
• Providing timely information on disease management to farmers
• The use of pesticides and insecticides is restricted to when necessary, thereby
promoting sustainable agriculture.
Transitioning to a Sustainable Smart Agriculture Using Deep Machine …
51
4
Conclusions
In order to increase food production, sustainable agriculture must be implemented to
protect natural ecosystems, while maintaining nutritional value and safety. Detecting
the various natural phenomena occurring in these environments is an effective means
of achieving this goal. Agricultural ecosystems can be understood using remote
sensing, big data analysis, cloud computing and Internet of Things.
In the past few years, machine vision, digital image processing and image analysis
have strongly advanced to be and a signiﬁcant part of artiﬁcial intelligence and the
interface between human and machine-based theory and applied technology. These
technologies have been widely applied in industry and medicine, and efforts are being
made to apply them to the agricultural sector as well. Thus, DML has signiﬁcantly
improved the identiﬁcation and diagnosis of various plant pests and diseases.
An examination of the transition to smart sustainable agriculture utilizing
DML techniques is presented in this chapter. The case study of an initiative developed
by the International Hellenic University, a Greek university located in a rural area,
was also discussed. Developed by a research team of the Department of Computer,
Informatics, and Telecommunications Engineering, this project aims to develop new
applications and services that rely heavily on deep machine learning, for the purpose
of promoting sustainable agricultural practices. Several models have been developed
to diagnose and treat a variety of crops during various developmental stages in a
timely manner, and drone images have been collected at various stages to improve
plant health and reduce pesticide and fertilizer usage, thereby improving plant health.
As a result, crop yields can be increased in a more sustainable manner. By uploading
a photo of their crop, Greek farmers receive a decision-making insight via a web
service. So, this project proved to be an excellent technique that can facilitate farmers
to quickly and easily identify their crop infestations in real time in the ﬁeld.
Modern technologies and smart agriculture techniques are being applied in
the agricultural sector to increase harvests and minimize losses, which directly
contributes to sustainability. Providing an environment-friendly option for agricul-
ture, the reduction of agrochemical inputs is beneﬁcial for the environment, while at
the same time increase the income of farmers due to the harvest of a larger, healthier
and safer crop. Furthermore, a reduced use of agrochemicals protects both farmers’
health and that of rural residents as well.
In the next step, the web service should be evaluated by the farmers in order to
identify the difﬁculties and make the appropriate impovements.
References
Abade A,Ferreira PA,de BarrosVF(2021)Plant diseasesrecognitiononimagesusingconvolutional
neural networks: a systematic review. Comput Electron Agric 185:106125
Ale L, Sheta A, Li L, Wang Y, Zhang N (2019) Deep learning based plant disease detection for
smart agriculture. IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), pp 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1109/
GCWkshps45667.2019.9024439
52
A. Kounani et al.
Arivazhagan S, VinethLigi S (2018) Mango leaf diseases identiﬁcation using convolutional neural
network. Int J Pure Appl Math 120(6):11067–11079
Arsenovic M, Karanovic M, Sladojevic S, Anderla A, Stefanovic D (2019) Solving current limita-
tions of deep learning based approaches for plant disease detection. Symmetry 11:939. https://
doi.org/10.3390/sym11070939
Bach H, Mauser W (2018) Sustainable agriculture and smart farming. In: Mathieu PP, Aubrecht
C (eds) Earth observation open science and innovation. ISSI Scientiﬁc Report Series, vol 15.
Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-65633-5_12
Bargoti S, Underwood JP (2017) Image segmentation for fruit detection and yield estimation in
apple orchards. J Field Robot 34(6):1039–1060
Bedi P, Gole P (2021) Plant disease detection using hybrid model based on convolutional
autoencoder and convolutional neural network. Artif Intell Agric 5:90–101
Berbel J, Posadillo A (2018) Review and oducts. Sustainability 10:237. https://doi.org/10.3390/su1
0010237
Berkum SV, Dengerink J (2019) Transition to sustainable food systems: the Dutch circular approach
providing solutions to global challenges. Wageningen Economic Research, Hague. Report
number: 2019–082. https://doi.org/10.18174/495586
Bhatia GS, Ahuja P, Chaudhari D, Paratkar S, Patil A (2019) Plant disease detection using deep
learning. In: Xhafa F (ed), Smys S, Senjyu T, Lafata P (eds) Lecture notes on data engineering
and communications technologies, vol 44, 2nd international conference on computer networks
and communication technologies, ICCNCT 2019. Springer Nature Switzerland AG
Brahimi M, Boukhalfa K, Moussaoui A (2017) Deep learning for tomato diseases: classiﬁcation
and symptoms visualization. Appl Artif Intell 31(4):1–17
Brahimi M, Arsenovic M, Laraba S, Sladojevic S, Boukhalfa K, Moussaoui A (2018) Deep learning
for plant diseases: detection and saliency map visualisation. Human and machine learning,
Available at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/325651831_Deep_Learning_for_Plant_
Diseases_Detection_and_Saliency_Map_Visualisation
Chohan M, Khan A, Chohan R, Katpar SH, Mahar MS (2020) Plant disease detection using deep
learning. Int J Recent Techol Eng (IJRTE) 9(1):909–914
Dhanaraju M, Chenniappan P, Ramalingam K, Pazhanivelan S, Kaliaperumal R (2022) Smart
farming: Internet of Things (IoT)-Based sustainable agriculture. Agriculture 12:1745. https://
doi.org/10.3390/agriculture12101745
Dias PA, Tabb A, Medeiros H (2018) Multispecies fruit ﬂower detection using a reﬁned semantic
segmentation network. IEEE Robot Autom Lett 3(4):3003–3010
Elnemr HA (2019) Convolutional neural network architecture for plant seedling classiﬁcation. Int
J Adv Comput Sci Appl 10(8):319–325
Fawzy ZF, El-Ramady H (2022) Applications and challenges of smart farming for developing
sustainable agriculture. Environ Biodivers Soil Secur 6:81–90
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) (2017) The future of food and
agriculture. Trends and challenges. FAO, Rome, Available: https://www.fao.org/3/i6583e/i65
83e.pdf
Fu X, Zhou Y, Yang F, Ma L, Long H, Zhong Y, Ni P (2021) A review of key technologies and trends
in the development of integrated heating and power systems in agriculture. Entropy 23:260
Ganchenko V, Doudkin A (2019) Image semantic segmentation based on convolutional neural
networks for monitoring agricultural vegetation. In: Ablameyko S, Krasnoproshin V, Lukashe-
vich M (eds) Pattern recognition and information processing. PRIP 2019. Communications in
computer and information science, vol 1055. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
030-35430-5_5
Goodfellow I, Bengio Y, Courville A (2016) Deep learning. In: Genetic programming and evolvable
machines, vol 19(1–2), p 800. The MIT Press. ISBN: 0262035618. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10
710-017-9314-z
Jararweh Y, Fatima S, Jarrah M, Al Zubi S (2023) Smart and sustainable agriculture: Fundamentals,
enabling technologies, and future directions. Comput Electr Eng 110:108799
Transitioning to a Sustainable Smart Agriculture Using Deep Machine …
53
Kamilaris A, Prenafeta-Boldu FX (2018) A review of the use of convolutional neural networks in
agriculture. J Agric Sci 156(3):312–322
Lee D, Kim K (2022) National investment framework for revitalizing the R&D collaborative
ecosystem of sustainable smart agriculture. Sustainability 14:6452. https://doi.org/10.3390/su1
4116452
Lin K, Gong L, Huang Y, Liu C, Pan J (2019) Deep learning-based segmentation and quantiﬁcation
of cucumber powdery mildew using convolutional neural network. J Front Plant Sci 10:155.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2019.00155
Liu Y, Liu S, Li C, Yang D (2019) Compressed sensing image reconstruction based on convolutional
neural network. Int J Comput Intell Syst 12(2):873–880
Lu Y, Yi S, Zeng N, Liu Y, Zhang Y (2017) Identiﬁcation of rice diseases using deep convolutional
neural networks. Neurocomputing 267:378–384
Mahadevan K, Punitha A, Suresh J (2024) Automatic recognition of rice plant leaf diseases detection
using deep neural network with improved threshold neural network, e-prime—advances in
electrical engineering. Electron Energy 100534
Mate PG, Singh KR, Khobragade A (2016) Feature extraction algorithm for estimation of agriculture
acreage from remote sensing images. In: World conference on futuristic trends in research and
innovation for social welfare (Startup Conclave), pp 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1109/STARTUP.
2016.7583964
Mohanty S, Hughes D, Salath M (2016) Using m deep learning for image-based plant disease
detection. Front Plant Sci 01419 https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls
Nagaraj G, Sungeetha D, Tiwari M, Ahuja V, Varma AK, Agarwal P (2023) Advancements in plant
pests detection: leveraging convolutional neural networks for smart agriculture. Eng Proc 59:201
O’Grady MJ, O’Hare GMP (2017) Modelling the smart farm. Inf Process Agric 4(3):179–187
O’Shaughnessy SA, Kim M, Lee S, Kim Y, Kim H, Shekailo J (2021) Towards smart farming
solutions in the U.S. and South Korea: a comparison of the current status. Geogr Sustain 2:312–
327
Panchal AV, Patel SC, Bagyalakshmi K, Kumar P, Khan IR, Soni M (2021), Image-based plant
diseases detection using deep learning. Mater Today: Proc. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2021.
07.281
Rai CK, Pahuja R (2024) Northern maize leaf blight disease detection and segmentation using deep
convolution neural networks. Multimedia Tools Appl 83:19415–19432
Ramdinthara IZ, Bala PS (2020) Issues and challenges in smart farming for sustainable agriculture.
In: Chapter in modern techniques for agricultural disease management and crop yield predic-
tion—advances in environmental engineering and green technologies, pp 1–22. https://doi.org/
10.4018/978-1-5225-9632-5.ch001
Rasul G (2021) A framework for addressing the twin challenges of COVID-19 and climate change
for sustainable agriculture and food security in South Asia. Front Sustain Food Syst 5:1–16
Richey B, Majumder S, Shirvaikar M, Kehtarnavaz N (2020) Real-time detection of maize crop
disease via a deep learning-based smartphone app. In: International Society for Optics and
Photonics Proceedings of SPIE 11401, Real-Time Image Processing and Deep Learnin, p
114010A. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2557317
Sanders CE, Gibson KE, Lamm AJ (2022) Rural broadband and precision agriculture: a frame
analysis of united states federal policy outreach under the Biden administration. Sustainability
14:46.0
Saraswat S, Singh P, Kumar M, Agarwal J (2024) Advanced detection of fungi-bacterial diseases
in plants using modiﬁed deep neural network and DSURF. Multimedia Tools Appl 83:16711–
16733
Sladojevic S, Arsenovic M, Anderla A, Culibrk D, Stefanovic D (2016) Deep neural networks based
recognition of plant diseases by leaf image classiﬁcation. Comput Intell Neurosci 3289801.
https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/3289801
Tao W, Zhao L, Wang G, Liang R (2021) Review of the internet of things communication
technologies in smart agriculture and challenges. Comput Electron Agric 189:106352
54
A. Kounani et al.
Toda Y, Okura F (2019) How convolutional neural networks diagnose plant disease. Plant Phenomics
Article ID 9237136:14. https://doi.org/10.34133/2019/9237136
Udawant P, Srinath P (2019) Diseased portion classiﬁcation and recognition of cotton plants using
convolution neural networks. Int J Eng Adv Technol(IJEAT) 8(6):3492–3496
West S, Bravo C, Oberti R, Lemaire D, Moshou D, McCartney HA (2003) The potential of optical
canopy measurement for targeted control of ﬁeld crop diseases. Annu Rev Phytopathol 41:593–
614
Zhang C, Liu J, Yu F, Wan S, Han Y, Wang J, Wang G (2018) Segmentation model based on
convolutional neural networks for extracting vegetation from Gaofen-2 images. J Appl Remote
Sens 12(4):042804
Sustainable Infrastructure and Climate
Change: Natural Disaster Risk Insurance
Solutions for Belt and Road Countries
Jintao Yang, Kirill Savrassov, and Nikolai Gorbatchev
Abstract There is a strong relationship between climate change and natural catas-
trophes. Climate change pertains to enduring alterations in temperature, rainfall,
and additional atmospheric conditions, which arise from human actions, predom-
inantly the combustion of fossil fuels. Natural catastrophes encompass extensive
natural disasters such as hurricanes, ﬂoods, and droughts, which result in extensive
destruction on a massive scale. Chapter’s objectives include analysis of infrastruc-
ture sustainability of the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) countries located on transport
corridor China—EU. BRI aiming at the creation of infrastructure for international
trade between African, European and Asian countries, according to the World Bank,
will increase the volume of trade by 30%, the volume of foreign investment by
70%, can help the upliftment of 7.6 million individuals from severe poverty and
improve the conditions for 32 million individuals in moderate poverty. Applica-
tion the insurance-linked securities (ILS) mechanisms can assist in rapid access to
ﬁnances for local communities in case of natural catastrophes. This is important as
over 62% of the region’s transport infrastructure is at risk from natural disasters,
referring to report “Climate Change and Earthquake Impacts in the Asia–Paciﬁc
Region Energy and Transport Infrastructure Assessment” (Asian Development Bank
2022. Climate Change and Earthquake Exposure in Asia and The Paciﬁc Assess-
ment of Energy and Transport Infrastructure. Accessed 5 June 2023 from 10.22617/
TCS178839-2). Employed methodology included studying the statistical data and
analysis of querying the insurance professionals on insurance-based approach to the
implementation of SDGs and natural disaster protections of developing countries.
As a result, insurance coverage for natural catastrophes is an important issue for
J. Yang (B)
University of Latvia, Riga, Latvia
e-mail: jy22003@edu.lu.lv
K. Savrassov
Phoenix CRetro Ltd., London, UK
e-mail: k.savrassov@phoenix-re.co.uk
N. Gorbatchev
International Institute of Management and Business (IIMB) and Minsk Branch of Plekhanov
Russian University of Economics, Minsk, Belarus
e-mail: ngorbachev@sbmt.by
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_4
55
56
J. Yang et al.
these countries linked to Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): climate change,
sustainable infrastructure, health and well-being.
Keywords Sustainable infrastructure · Climate change · Natural disaster risk
insurance · Environmental sustainability
1
Introduction
The global community has made a concerted effort to incorporate sustainability into
activities across all sectors since the introduction of the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) (UN 2015). The goals seek to address global challenges like poverty,
inequality, degradation of the environment, and climate change, alongside promoting
peace and justice (Leal Filho et al. 2023). The initial idea of SDGs was targeted at
the three aspects of sustainability: environmental, economic, and social spheres.
Investing in infrastructure plays an essential role in the achievement of sustainable
development. Making incorrect decisions could lead to neglecting the requirements
of groups and nations. SDGs principles are aimed at efforts towards the creation of
an inclusive, sustainable, and resilient future for populations and the planet.
The Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) was launched in 2013 (McBride et al. 2023).
Thus, it had to follow the SDGs approach in public development. The BRI holds
substantial promise in aiding nations in their pursuit of sustainable development. This
aims to promote enduring environmentally friendly and sustainable progress to all
concerned nations, in alignment with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The creation of infrastructure for international trade with Asian countries,
according to the World Bank, will increase the volume of trade by 30%, the volume
of foreign investment by 70%, and alleviate extreme poverty for 7.6 million indi-
viduals while raising 32 million individuals from moderate poverty (Asian Devel-
opment Bank 2022). The project requires signiﬁcant investments in the creation
of infrastructure. According to the Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD 2018) and the American Enterprise Institute (AEI 2023),
from December 2013 to December 2022, China’s involvement in the BRI, which
encompasses construction agreements funded by Chinese ﬁnancial institutions, and
investments, reached a total value of approximately 881 billion US dollars.
The research on climate change and earthquake impacts in the Asia–Paciﬁc region
energy and transport infrastructure assessment indicates that more than 62% of the
region’s transport infrastructure is at risk from natural disasters (Asian Development
Bank 2022). At the same time, energy infrastructure facilities are subject to the
risks of earthquakes (72.4%), cyclones (22.4%) and sea level rise (8.3%). It can be
stated that there is an increase in risks for governments and the population associated
with global natural and climate change. The damage caused by them over the past 30
years has increased by more than ﬁve times. According to experts, direct and indirect
damage from major disasters is 4–5% of the gross national product (Lane 2022).
Sustainable Infrastructure and Climate Change: Natural Disaster Risk …
57
In addition to the risks of natural disasters, many of the BRI countries are devel-
oping countries. Natural disasters occurring in low-income countries lead to a signif-
icant surge in social inequality. The recovery of such countries after natural disasters
takes longer, which leads to a decline in the living standards of the population for a
long period.
This issue is topical to most countries. According to the current UN SDGs progress
report, as of the end of 2022, the number of countries with local governments imple-
menting disaster risk reduction strategies had risen to 102, which is a signiﬁcant
increase compared to the 51 countries reported in 2015 (UN 2023).
As the amount of natural catastrophes increase due to climate change, the current
agenda for sustainable development research is closely related with rapid elimination
of their consequences.
This paper discusses one of the promising solutions for ﬁnancing the elimination
of possible consequences of natural catastrophes, namely insurance-linked securities
(ILS).ILSareﬁnancialderivativesthatprovideinvestmentattractivenessofinsurance
risks, allowing institutional investors to directly participate in the reinsurance of
peak risks in exchange for an acceptable level of proﬁtability. They are designed to
transfer risks from the insurance industry to the much larger capital markets, allowing
insurers or government agencies to shift some of their catastrophic risks to investors,
providing the latter with a unique diversiﬁcation of investment portfolios, since these
instruments are not subject to macroeconomic cycles and in no way associated with
ﬂuctuations in the stock, currency and other markets.
2
Methodology
The authors studied statistical data available from different sources related to the
economic sustainability of countries of the EU-China transport corridor directly or
indirectly related to SDGs:
SDG 9—Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure encompasses the development
of critical infrastructure, including disaster-resilient infrastructure, which is a key
component in the prevention and management of catastrophes.
SDG 11—Sustainable Cities and Communities, which focuses on building resilient
and sustainable cities and communities, enhancing the preparation for and response
to catastrophes.
SDG 13—Climate Action, as it addresses the need for countries to mitigate carbon
emissions and adapt to the consequences of climate change, such as the heightened
occurrence and intensity of extreme weather.
The statistical data analysis included such indicators as:
– distribution of BRI countries by income level required for understanding the
ﬁnancial stability of local communities in case of natural catastrophes;
58
J. Yang et al.
– non-life insurance penetration rates for China-EU transport corridor countries for
2018–2022 to identify the availability of ﬁnances to the local communities in case
of disaster occurrence;
– estimation of the volume of reserve state funds intended to combat the conse-
quences of natural disasters and other emergency situations, which are important
for ﬁnancial sustainability at the state level.
In addition, the present research is based on the results of a questionnaire among
alumni of the CPD-certiﬁed course “The Fundamentals of ILS” (ILS n.d.). The
methodology for this research involved administering a questionnaire to 121 insur-
ance professionals to gather their opinions and knowledge about the UN SDGs and
catastrophes. The survey included questions related to the perception of current risks
facing the infrastructure, current insurance and risk management practices, under-
standing of the ILS approach, and the willingness and ability of respondents to partic-
ipate in providing coverage for infrastructure risks. The questionnaire also assessed
therespondents’understandingofhowthisapproachcancontributetomeetingSDGs.
The ﬁrst step in the process was to design the questionnaire, which consisted of
a mix of closed-ended and open-ended questions. The closed-ended questions were
aimed at collecting quantitative data and included multiple choice questions and
Likert scale questions where respondents could rate their level of agreement with a
statement on a scale of 1–5. The open-ended questions were aimed at collecting
qualitative data and allowed respondents to provide more detailed and nuanced
answers.
After the survey responses were collected, the data were analyzed utilizing
descriptive statistical methods. Descriptive statistics were applied for summarizing
the data and providing an overview of the respondents’ opinions. The results were
generalized for understanding the relationship between knowledge about the SDGs
and attitudes towards catastrophe bonds.
Finally, the results of the survey were compiled into a report that summarized
the ﬁndings and provided insights into the current state of knowledge and attitudes
among insurance professionals towards the SDGs and catastrophe bonds.
3
Belt and Road Initiative
By building and maintaining the infrastructure, communities can improve access to
basic human needs while also supporting economic growth. Furthermore, sustainable
infrastructure development can contribute to reduced carbon emissions, increased
energy efﬁciency, and improved natural resource management.
Infrastructure projects have a signiﬁcant impact on the promotion of sustainable
development. Infrastructure refers to the basic physical and organizational structures
and facilities that are essential to the functioning of society, such as roads, bridges,
water systems, schools, hospitals, and power grids. An adequate and well-functioning
infrastructure is essential for economic growth and development as it ensures the
Sustainable Infrastructure and Climate Change: Natural Disaster Risk …
59
efﬁcient production, distribution and exchange of goods and services. It also supports
social development by providing better employment, access to quality education, and
improved healthcare.
Moreover, investments in infrastructure create new jobs and stimulate economic
activity, which leads to further development.
In addition, by providing access to basic services, infrastructure can improve
living standards and help reduce poverty. Infrastructure holds a critical position in a
country’s development, underpinning economic and social progress and supporting
the well-being and prosperity of communities.
Oneofthelargestinfrastructureprojectsofthe21stcenturyistheBRI,launchedby
the Chinese government in 2013. It is aimed at connecting countries in Asia, Europe,
Africa and Oceania with networks of roads, railways, ports and other transport infras-
tructure facilities in order to develop trade, investment and economic cooperation
between the participating countries.
The initiative is based on two main components: the Silk Road Economic Belt,
with the objective of linking China to Europe via Central and West Asia, and the
Maritime Silk Road, aiming to establish connections between China, Southeast Asia,
Africa, and Europe.
The BRI is seen as an investment and development opportunity for participating
countries. To this end, China allocates signiﬁcant investment to ﬁnance infrastructure
projects. This initiative has been supported by many countries, especially in Asia and
Africa, as a way to foster their economic growth and connectivity with the rest of
the world.
At the time of this writing, the memorandum on participation in the BRI has been
signed by 147 states (Fanhai International School of Finance n.d.), of which:
– 43 countries are in sub-Saharan Africa;
– 35 BRI countries are located in Europe and Central Asia (including 18 EU
countries that are part of the BRI);
– 25 countries are in East Asia and the Paciﬁc region;
– 20 BRI countries are located in Latin America and the Caribbean;
– 18 BRI countries in the Middle East and North Africa;
– 6 countries are in Southeast Asia.
The level of national income in the BRI countries is shown in Table 1. A signiﬁcant
part of the countries participating in the initiative belongs to countries with lower
middle income. This leads to instability and inequality of access to resources in the
development of the project infrastructure.
Critics of the initiative raise a number of concerns (Lo 2021; Enderwick 2021),
including concerns about the project’s debt sustainability and transparency, China’s
growing global inﬂuence, and the environmental impact and potential cultural bias
of some infrastructure projects.
Despite this, the BRI is playing an important role today in promoting interna-
tional trade, investment and economic cooperation (Belt and Road Portal n.d.). For
sustainable China-EU transport links, the geographically key states of the BRI are
60
J. Yang et al.
Table 1 Distribution of BRI
countries by income level
Income group
Amount of BRI countries
High income
34
Above average income
42
Below average income
41
Low income
30
Total
147
Source Design according to data from Fanhai International School
of Finance (n.d.)
Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Mongolia, Russia, Turkey and Uzbek-
istan. Discussing the issues of economic sustainability of these countries in case of
natural disasters, we can mention that they are developing countries that have to
implement the local disaster reduction risk strategies (UN 2023). Some of examples
from policies of Georgia and Kazakhstan are provided by Großmann et al. (2023).
However, this paper adds examples from more BRI countries.
4
Infrastructure Sustainability for BRI Transit Countries
The main problems hindering the formation of a comprehensive system for protecting
infrastructure from the consequences of natural disasters for the China-EU transit
countries are the extremely low coverage of insurance and a large share of state
ownership of transport infrastructure facilities.
Despite the high risks of catastrophes in the BRI countries, the level of insurance
coverage (insurance penetration) is extremely low. The insurance coverage parameter
serves as a measure of the growth of the insurance industry within a nation. It is
determined by dividing the total insurance premiums by the gross domestic product
(GDP) for a speciﬁc year (Enz 2000).
The following formula is used to calculate the level of insurance penetration:
IPR =

IP

GDP

× 100%,
where
IPR
non-life insurance penetration rate
IP
non-life insurance premiums refer to the total premiums collected by non-life
insurance companies over a speciﬁed period (usually one year)
GDP Gross Domestic Product, represents the total value of all products and services
produced within a speciﬁc nation during a speciﬁed timeframe.
Results for BRI countries are listed in Table 2.
For most countries, the level of insurance coverage is proportional to the level of
wealth growth. However, in the countries under consideration, the structure of GDP
Sustainable Infrastructure and Climate Change: Natural Disaster Risk …
61
Table 2 Non-life insurance penetration rates for China-EU transport corridor countries for 2018–
2022
China-EU transport corridor BRI countries
2022
2021
2020
2019
2018
World average
3,90
3,90
3,88
3,70
3,68
Türkiye
2,32
2,17
2,05
1,89
1,84
China
1,90
1,90
2,01
n/d
n/d
Azerbaijan
1,45
1,15
1,24
1,35
1,45
Russia
0,90
0,90
0,97
n/d
n/d
Belarus
n/d
n/d
0,74
0,76
0,76
Georgia
n/d
n/d
0,67
0,67
0,62
Kazakhstan
0,50
0,50
0,47
0,50
n/d
Mongolia
n/d
n/d
0,46
0,44
0,46
Uzbekistan
n/d
n/d
n/d
0,30
n/d
Sources Bank of Azerbaijan (n.d.), Carec (2022a, 2022b), Central Bank of Russia (2023), Global
Economy (2023a, 2023b, 2023c). Swiss Re Institute (2020, 2022), Turkish-Insurance-Association
(n.d.)
leads to a negative correlation between insurance coverage and the share of natural
resource rent.
This effect is observed in countries with economies heavily dependent on natural
resources (for example, Russia or Kazakhstan). The negative correlation between
insurance coverage and the share of natural resource rent in GDP can be explained
by the following factors:
1. Economic dependence on natural resources: in countries where a signiﬁcant
part of GDP comes from the extraction of natural resources, the economy can
be highly concentrated in a particular industry or sector, which can lead to an
uneven distribution of wealth and economic activity. In such cases, insurance
coverage may be perceived as less important or necessary, since natural resource
wealth can be used to cover potential losses or risks.
2. Public safety nets and subsidies: In countries with signiﬁcant resource rents,
the government may provide safety nets or subsidies to individuals or busi-
nesses, which reduces the perceived need for insurance coverage. For example,
the government may provide subsidies for fuel, utilities, or other essential goods
and services in times of natural disasters. This results in a reduced demand for
insurance coverage, as individuals and legal entities rely on government support
in the event of adverse events.
3. Risk perception and cultural factors. Risk perception and cultural variables may
also contribute to the insurance coverage level. In some countries with high
resource rents, there is a belief that the risks associated with property, liability or
other non-death events are small or that they can be mitigated through traditional
or informal budgetary mechanisms rather than with the help of insurance.
62
J. Yang et al.
It is crucial to acknowledge that the presence of correlation does not necessarily
indicate causality, and that there may be other variables that affect insurance coverage
in countries with high resource rents. In addition, the relationship between GDP
structure and insurance coverage can be complex and vary by country, economic
context, and other factors. Further research and analysis will be needed to better
understand the relationship between GDP structure, resource rents and insurance
coverage across regions and countries. Also, an important obstacle to the organization
of an effective system for protecting infrastructure from natural disasters is local
protectionism in reinsurance (Global Reconstruction Foundation 2023). This practice
leads to the concentration of risks within the country, while limiting the choice, and
is observed to one degree or another in Belarus, China, Mongolia, Uzbekistan, and
Russia.
Addressing the pressing and extensive issues encountered by developing nations
in the event of a signiﬁcant natural disaster, it becomes imperative to prioritize
employing inventive approaches for ﬁnancing the aftermath of such disastrous risks.
For emergency disaster ﬁnance, these innovations include national disaster funds,
regional pooling schemes using parametric insurance, conditional credit lines,
catastrophe bonds, and other insurance derivatives market solutions.
Discussing the issues of infrastructure sustainability of this countries, it is neces-
sary to mention that the key challenges faced by sustainable infrastructure designs is
the low risk-adjusted returns they tend to generate. This is primarily due to the fact
that investments in sustainability are often not adequately compensated by revenue
streams or public incentives (International Institute for Sustainable Development
2018). However, it is crucial to create a supportive environment that encourages
investment in sustainable infrastructure. This can be done through the introduction
of appropriate ﬁnancial mechanisms, such as subsidies, tax incentives, and grants,
targeting sustainable projects.
5
Sustainability of Available Funds for Natural Disasters
A high proportion of state ownership of infrastructure may discourage the clas-
sical disaster insurance model, as there is a high risk that insurance companies and
government agencies will be forced to interact as parties with common interests.
When the state owns most of the major infrastructure, like roads, bridges, and
power plants, among others, natural disasters can result in considerable damage
to both state property and its population. In this situation, insurance companies
may face a number of difﬁculties in determining the actual number of losses and
indemniﬁcation.
Therefore, in some cases, government agencies may choose to create their own
reserve fund or use alternative methods of ﬁnancing, such as government loans, to
protect their property and population in the event of natural disasters.
Sustainable Infrastructure and Climate Change: Natural Disaster Risk …
63
Some of these countries have reserve public funds designed to deal with natural
disasters and other emergencies. An estimate of the volumes of these funds is given
in Table 3.
China has set up several reserve funds to fund disaster relief and disaster recovery
efforts. The National Disaster Reduction and Relief Fund is administered by the
Ministry of Finance and is used to provide emergency relief and support to disaster-
affected areas. As of 2021, the fund has accumulated more than 190 billion yuan
(approximately $29 billion) in reserves, according to ofﬁcial ﬁgures. The Natural
Disaster Insurance Fund is administered by the China Insurance Regulatory Commis-
sion and is used to compensate for losses caused by natural disasters. The Fund is
mainly ﬁnanced by insurance premiums paid by individuals and legal entities. As of
2021, the fund has accumulated over 50 billion yuan (approximately $7.7 billion) in
reserves.
The World Bank (PreventionWeb n.d.) recommends to the countries of Central
Asia the creation of a regional disaster risk insurance pool, which would contribute
to the rapid growth of demand for separate coverage of catastrophe risks in each of
the countries of the region through the introduction of compulsory insurance of the
entire housing stock in cities. In addition to enabling local homeowners to purchase
affordable and reliable insurance coverage, a regional insurance pool mechanism
would also reduce the ﬁnancial exposure of local insurers and governments to catas-
trophe risk. Given the higher level of development of the Kazakhstan insurance
market compared to other countries in the region, apparently Almaty could be the
most suitable place for placing such a regional insurance fund.
In world practice, there are four commonly used approaches for ﬁnancing the
mitigation of the effects caused by natural disasters (Table 4).
Table 3 Estimation of the volume of reserve state funds intended to combat the consequences of
natural disasters and other emergency situations for 2022
EU-China transport corridor
countries
Availability of a reserve fund
The size of the reserve fund
(in EUR)
Russia
Yes
25.5 billion
China
Yes
5.8 billion
Kazakhstan
Yes
843 million
Uzbekistan
Yes
80 million
Mongolia
Yes
2.2 million
Türkiye
Yes
12.3 billion
Azerbaijan
Yes
39 million
Georgia
Yes
30 million
Belarus
No (costs are provided for in
the Law on the Republican
Budget)
Sources Carec (2022a, 2022b), Law (2021), Ministry of Finance (n.d.), Reuters (2022)
64
J. Yang et al.
Table 4 Current approaches for ﬁnancing the elimination of the consequences of natural disasters
Approaches
Description
National disaster funds
Internal budget rule. Authorities have the option to utilize ﬁscal means
to take advantage of reserve funds. The government’s allocated budget
determines the expenditure for the reserve fund. Another approach is
for governments to secure loans to ﬁnance emergency funds, whereby
the expenses include the present value of the principal amount and the
interest payments on the borrowed funds. Additionally, governments
may assume the responsibility of covering the administrative or legal
expenses linked to the establishment of a reserve fund
Conditional credit lines
Pre-negotiated “deferred” credit lines with international ﬁnancial
institutions, such as World Bank, International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, Islamic Development Bank etc. The
cost of a conditional loan consists of two elements: the present value
of the loan’s principal and interest payments for any portion that has
been utilized, typically offered at lower interest rates by multilateral
development banks compared to what the country paid in the private
market, along with the costs linked to the transaction
Sovereign parametric
insurance products
Numerous regional insurance pools have been established by
governments and development partners with the aim of providing
developing nations with sovereign parametric insurance. The cost is
the insurance premium on the policy paid by the government. The level
of the premium is primarily determined by expected losses (taking into
account the selected policy options). Other factors, including
reinsurance and operating costs, also affect the level of premiums
Catastrophe bonds
(CAT bonds)
Transferring disaster risk to private capital markets. The cost of a
catastrophe bond consists of two elements: the present value of the
annual coupon payments that need to be made by the issuer throughout
the duration of the catastrophe bond, along with the expenses and fees
related to the transaction in terms of legality and administration
Source prepared by authors
A successful example of natural disaster resilience is the Bosphorus catastrophe
bonds issued by the Turkish Catastrophe Insurance Pool (TCIP), which is a state-
owned insurance company in Turkey. The bonds are intended to transfer the risk of
natural disasters, such as earthquakes and ﬂoods in the Istanbul region, from TCIP
to investors in the capital markets.
Bosphorus Catastrophe bonds were ﬁrst issued in 2013 and were the ﬁrst catas-
trophe bonds issued by a Turkish entity. The bonds were issued in several tranches
with different maturities and coverages. The triggers were speciﬁc natural disasters:
earthquakes or ﬂoods, which correspond to predetermined criteria.
Sustainable Infrastructure and Climate Change: Natural Disaster Risk …
65
6
Surveying Insurance Professionals on SDGs and Natural
Catastrophe Protection
In order to conﬁrm the hypothesis of correlations between the ILS approach for the
protection of critical infrastructure of the China-EU transport route and SDGs, a
survey was introduced to 121 insurance market professionals.
Research Objective: The aim of this research is to investigate the feasibility of
introducing an ILS approach for protecting the critical infrastructure of China-EU
transport routes. Additionally, the research will examine how this approach can
contribute to SDGs and increase the resiliency of infrastructure against natural
disasters and human-caused disruptions.
Data Collection: Data was collected using a questionnaire addressed to alumni
of the CPD-certiﬁed course “The Fundamentals of ILS”. As a selection method, the
random sampling method was used. The locations of the respondents are indicated
in Fig. 1.
It is notable that participants from Europe (30%) and Asia (27%) had the
highest representation among the regions surveyed. Professionals from various
regions, including Africa and Australia/Oceania, participated in the research, thereby
providing a more diverse and global perspective.
Professional segmentation of survey participants is available in Table 5.
These results indicate that (re-)insurers constituted the largest proportion of partic-
ipants at 35%, indicating a strong interest within the industry in the relationship
between SDGs and ILS. It is also notable that Sovereign Pools, Academia, Asset
Managers, and Brokers all had notable representation among the respondents, with
each making up more than 10% of the participants. The diverse range of professionals
who participated in the survey is very encouraging, as it suggests that there is a broad
interest in understanding the connections between SDGs and ILS.
20%
17%
27%
6%
30%
Africa
America
Asia
Australia and Oceania
Europe
Fig. 1 Location of interviewees (Total 121 people)
66
J. Yang et al.
Table 5 Professional
segmentation of ILS and SDG
survey participants
Participants
% in sample (%)
(Re-)insurers
35
Sovereign pools
12
Academia
12
Asset managers
11
Brokers
11
InsurTech
7
UN agencies
5
Law
5
Public sector
2
Source Prepared by authors
It is encouraging to see that the majority (80%) of the respondents considered
SDGs to be “very important” and “highly important”, indicating a strong recognition
among insurance professionals of the signiﬁcance of creating sustainable solutions
thatenableenvironmentalandsocialprogress.Furthermore,afurther20%considered
SDGs “important”, highlighting the interest that insurers have in aligning with global
sustainable development goals. It is vital for the ﬁnancial industry to realize that
SDGs not only align with their corporate social responsibility targets but also present
enormous business opportunities for insurance and ﬁnancial companies.
On the question “In your opinion, which SDGs are most relevant to the insurance
industry and ILS?” the responders graded them in the following way:
1. Goal 17: Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the Global
Partnership for Sustainable Development.
2. Goal 13: Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts.
3. Goal 11: Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and
sustainable.
4. Goal 7: Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for
all.
5. Goal 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote
sustainable agriculture.
The next question was related with determining the other areas the insurance
industry could focus on to better contribute to the achievement of the SDGs? The
results of multiple-choice responses are listed in Table 6.
In relation with future actions to promote closer relations between insurance
support to the states and communities that may suffer from climate change and
natural catastrophes, the respondents noted:
1. Collaborate with government and multilateral institutions: Working with govern-
ments and multilateral institutions can help align ILS with development priorities
and promote investments in sustainable infrastructure and other key areas.
Sustainable Infrastructure and Climate Change: Natural Disaster Risk …
67
Table 6 Prospective contribution of the insurance industry to the implementation of SDGs
Action
SDG reference
Votes
Developing ILS that speciﬁcally target investments
in green and sustainable infrastructure projects,
such as renewable energy or sustainable transport
SDG 7: Affordable and Clean
Energy, SDG 9: Industry,
Innovation and Infrastructure
57
Developing ILS that cover risks associated with
climate change, such as extreme weather events,
sea-level rise, or agricultural losses, to help reduce
vulnerability and build resilience
SDG 13: Climate Action
50
Developing ILS that support sustainable
development goals in developing countries, such as
ﬁnancing for health and education, small and
medium-sized enterprises, or microﬁnance
SDG 1: No Poverty, SDG 3: Good
Health and Well-being, SDG 4:
Quality Education, SDG 8: Decent
Work and Economic Growth
50
Developing ILS that promote biodiversity
conservation and ecosystem services, such as
supporting reforestation or coastal protection
projects
SDG 15: Life on Land, SDG 14:
Life Below Water
33
Developing ILS that address social and governance
issues, such as supporting projects that promote
gender equality, human rights, or transparency and
accountability
SDG 5: Gender Equality, SDG 16:
Peace, Justice and Strong
Institutions
8
Source Prepared by authors
2. Encourage greater transparency and reporting: By providing more information on
the sustainability impacts of ILS, market players can build trust with stakeholders
and promote greater alignment with SDGs.
3. Engage with civil society organizations and communities: By engaging with civil
society organizations and communities, ILS market players can better understand
local needs and priorities, and design products that are more responsive to these
needs.
4. Innovate and develop new products: ILS can be designed to address speciﬁc
SDGs, such as climate action, gender equality, and sustainable cities and commu-
nities. By innovating and developing new products, market players can drive
positive social impact and promote greater alignment with SDGs.
5. Provide education and capacity building: By providing education and capacity
building to stakeholders, ILS market players can help build understanding and
awareness of the role that these instruments can play in supporting sustainable
development.
Finally, the survey referred to the role can ILS play in addressing climate risks
and promoting environmental sustainability. The results of multiple choice are listed
in Table 7.
The research ﬁndings will be used to evaluate the feasibility of implementing an
ILS-based approach for infrastructure protection. Moreover, the results will explore
how this approach can contribute to SDGs and the protection of infrastructure. The
68
J. Yang et al.
Table 7 Prospective roles of ILS in addressing climate risks and promoting environmental
sustainability
Actions
Votes
Mitigating climate-related risks
41
Encouraging investments in climate-resilient infrastructure
57
Promoting the development of renewable energy
8
Facilitating climate-related risk transfer
50
Promoting sustainable business practices
25
Providing ﬁnancial protection for vulnerable communities
66
Facilitating the transition to a low-carbon economy
8
Source Prepared by authors
results of querying seem to be useful for further implementation of the ILS approach
to natural catastrophe insurance protection for developing countries.
7
Conclusions
This research was based on two main approaches:
– studying the statistical data related to critical infrastructure in BRI coun-
tries located on transport route China—EU (China, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan,
Mongolia, Türkiye, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Belarus)
– results of querying the insurance professionals on insurance-based approach to the
implementation of SDGs and natural disaster protections of developing countries.
The Chinese government’s BRI includes the construction of various transport
infrastructure projects such as roads, railways, ports and pipelines to facilitate trade
and economic integration between participating countries. The Belt and Road coun-
tries that are part of the China-EU land transport corridor are at high risk of natural
disasters. This leads to the uncertainty associated with possible physical damage to
the infrastructure being built, potential disruption of supply chains, as well as impacts
on local communities due to the risk of damage to the local economy, disruption of
the social fabric, labor availability, etc.
The main lessons from the paper are:
1. There are peculiarities of investment in infrastructure facilities by the Chinese
government. In the vast majority of cases, the money is allocated under the
guarantees of the governments of the countries where the investments are made.
In the event of natural disasters, the risks are borne by local governments.
2. Sustainable infrastructure and climate change are two crucial aspects that need
to be addressed simultaneously. The implementation of ILS for BRI countries
is to mitigate the effects of climate change and reduce the damage caused by
Sustainable Infrastructure and Climate Change: Natural Disaster Risk …
69
natural disasters. The development of infrastructure and the implementation of
inclusive and accessible insurance mechanisms can help ensure sustainable and
resilient growth in these countries.
3. One of the few options for obtaining additional ﬁnancing to deal with major
natural disasters is World Bank conditional loans. To obtain them, a number
of conditions must be met (compliance with certain ﬁnancial management and
sustainability standards, a minimum damage threshold set by the World Bank).
In addition, the country must agree to the terms of the loan proposed by the World
Bank, such as interest rate, loan term, repayment schedule and other conditions.
That is, the loan leads to an increase in public debt to the World Bank for a state
affected by a natural disaster, which can make the macroeconomic position of
the state that suffered from natural disasters unsustainable.
4. Effective collaboration and partnership between governments, private sector
stakeholders,andinternationalorganizationscanleadtopractical,innovative,and
sustainable solutions in infrastructure and policy planning. These solutions can
help countries adapt to the changing climate and ensure sustainable development
for future generations.
5. ILS, as they are based on the capital market and can offer competitive conditions
on the cost of capital. Also, these instruments provide an opportunity for insurers
and reinsurers to diversify risk by raising capital from various sources, which
can reduce risk-related capital investments and improve the ﬁnancial stability of
companies. ILS allow for fast payouts in the event of an insurance trigger as they
are based on pre-determined activation and payout criteria, which can facilitate
a faster response to natural disasters and help manage ﬁnancial challenges.
The results of this paper also indicate that insurance professionals have deep
understanding of relations between natural catastrophes preventions and protection
and SDGs.
ILS professionals that participated in the research, suggested the following actions
for BRI countries that are directly addressing the following SDGs (SDG-1, SDG-3,
SDG-5, SDG-7, SDG-8, SDG-9, SDG-13, SDG-14, SDG-15, SDG-16):
1. Developing ILS that speciﬁcally target investments in green and sustainable
infrastructure projects, such as renewable energy or sustainable transport.
2. Developing ILS that cover risks associated with climate change, such as extreme
weather events, sea-level rise, or agricultural losses, to help reduce vulnerability
and build resilience.
3. Developing ILS that support sustainable development goals in developing coun-
tries, such as ﬁnancing for health and education, small and medium-sized
enterprises, or microﬁnance.
4. Developing ILS that promote biodiversity conservation and ecosystem services,
such as supporting reforestation or coastal protection projects.
5. Developing ILS that address social and governance issues, such as supporting
projects that promote gender equality, human rights, or transparency and
accountability.
70
J. Yang et al.
Outlining the future research prospects, our team plans to link it with the
assessment of the possibility of implementing the “System of global indicators for
achieving sustainable development goals and achieving the goals of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development” (UN 2017) to insurance protection against natural
disasters using the ILS mechanisms.
References
AEI (2023). China Global Investment Tracker. Accessed 5 June 2023 from https://www.aei.org/
china-global-investment-tracker/
Asian Development Bank (2022) Climate Change and Earthquake Exposure in Asia and The Paciﬁc
Assessment of Energy and Transport Infrastructure. Accessed 5 June 2023 from https://doi.org/
10.22617/TCS178839-2
Bank of Azerbaijan (n.d.). Insurance statistics. Accessed 5 June 2023 from https://www.cbar.az/en/
statistics
Belt and Road Portal (n.d.) Macroeconomic data. Accessed 5 June 2023 from https://eng.yidaiyilu.
gov.cn/dsjym.htm
Carec (2022a) Country Risk Proﬁle: Kazakhstan. Accessed 5 June 2023 from https://www.carecp
rogram.org/uploads/Country_Risk_Proﬁles_Kazakhstan_RU.pdf (in Russian)
Carec (2022b) Country Risk Proﬁle: Uzbekistan. Accessed 5 June 2023 from https://www.carecp
rogram.org/uploads/CAREC-Risk-Proﬁles_Uzbekistan_Rus.pdf (in Russian)
Central Bank of Russia (2023) Insurance statistics. Accessed 5 June 2023 from https://www.cbr.ru/
analytics/insurance/ (in Russian)
Global Economy (2023a) Belarus: Non-life insurance premium volume. Accessed 5 June 2023
from https://www.theglobaleconomy.com/Belarus/non_life_insurance_volume/
Global Economy (2023b) Georgia: Non-life insurance volume. Accessed 5 June 2023 from https://
www.theglobaleconomy.com/Georgia/non_life_insurance_volume/
Global Economy (2023c) Mongolia: non-life insurance premium volume. Accessed 5 June 2023
from https://www.theglobaleconomy.com/Mongolia/non_life_insurance_volume/
Enderwick P (2021) Viewpoint—could the belt and road initiative be derailed? an analysis of
impediments to completion. Crit Perspect Int Bus 17(3):463–480
Enz R (2000) The S-curve relation between per-capita income and insurance penetration. Geneva
Papers Risk Insur Issues Practice 25(3):396–406. https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-0440.00072
Fanhai International School of Finance (n.d.) Countries of the Belt and Road Initiative (BRI).
Accessed 5 June 2023 from https://greenfdc.org/countries-of-the-belt-and-road-initiative-bri/
Global Reconstruction Foundation (2023) Reinsurance Trade Barriers and Market Access. Accessed
5 June 2023 from https://www.grf.info/images/Publications/TradeBarriers/GRF_Trade_Bar
riers_Table_-_2023_v23May2023.pdf
Großmann A, Flaute M, Lutz C, Hohmann F., Banning M (2023) Modeling climate resilient
economic development. In: Leal Filho W, Kovaleva M, Alves F, Abubakar IR (eds) Climate
change strategies: handling the challenges of adapting to a changing climate: climate change
management. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-28728-2_4
ILS (n.d.) The Fundamentals of Insurance-Linked Securities. Accessed 5 June 2023 from https://
ils-course.com/
International Institute for Sustainable Development (2018) Special Policy Study on Green
Belt and Road and 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. IISD. Accessed 5
June 2023 from https://www.iisd.org/sites/default/ﬁles/publications/CCICED/engagement/
2018/green-belt-and-road-and-2030-agenda.pdf. Accessed 28 April 2022
Lane M (2022) The ILS loss experience: natural catastrophe issues 2001–2020. Geneva Papers Risk
Insur Issues Practice. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41288-022-00275-5
Sustainable Infrastructure and Climate Change: Natural Disaster Risk …
71
Law (2021) Law of the Republic of Belarus of December 31, 2021, No. 142-Z, On the republican
budget for 2022. Accessed 5 June 2023 from https://www.minﬁn.gov.by/upload/bp/act/zakon_
311221_142z.pdf (in Russian)
Leal Filho W, Krishnapillai M, Minhas A, Ali S, Nagle Alverio G, Hendy Ahmed MS, Naidu R,
Prasad RR, Bhullar N, ShariﬁA (2023) Climate change, extreme events and mental health in the
Paciﬁc region. Int J Clim Change Strat Manag 15(1):20–40. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJCCSM-
03-2022-0032
Lo C (2021) The disruptive belt and road initiative, China’s Global Disruption. Emerald Publishing
Limited, Bingley, pp 181–196
McBride J, Berman N, Chatzky A (2023) China’s massive belt and road initiative. Accessed 5 June
2023 from https://www.cfr.org/backgrounder/chinas-massive-belt-and-road-initiative
Ministry of Finance (n.d.) Ofﬁcial website of the Ministry of Finance of the Russian Federation.
Accessed 5 June 2023 from https://www.minﬁn.ru/ru/activity/reserve/ (in Russian)
OECD (2018) China’s Belt and Road Initiative in the Global Trade, Investment and Finance Land-
scape. Accessed 5 June 2023 from https://www.oecd.org/ﬁnance/Chinas-Belt-and-Road-Initia
tive-in-the-global-trade-investment-and-ﬁnance-landscape.pdf
PreventionWeb (n.d.) Risk Reduction and Mitigation Strategies for the Financial Sector in Russia.
Accessed 5 June 2023 from https://www.preventionweb.net/ﬁles/11742_FinRiskrus.pdf (in
Russian)
Reuters (2022) China’s seasonal ﬂoods bring new agricultural calamity. Accessed 5 June 2023 from
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-ﬂoods-agriculture-idUSKCN24N07M
Swiss Re Institute (2020) World insurance: inﬂation risks front and centre. Accessed 5
June 2023 from https://www.swissre.com/dam/jcr:864e8938-3d3c-48cc-a3d7-8682962971e7/
sigma-4-2020-extra-complete.pdf
Swiss Re Institute (2022) World insurance: inﬂation risks front and centre. Accessed 5 June
2023 from https://www.swissre.com/dam/jcr:4500fe30-7d7b-4bc7-b217-085d7d87a35b/swiss-
re-institute-sigma-4-2022.pdf
Turkish Insurance Association (n.d.) Insurance and Private Pension Financial Tables and Statistics.
Accessed 5 June 2023 from https://www.tsb.org.tr/en/stats
UN (2017) Global indicator framework for the Sustainable Development Goals and targets of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development Accessed 5 June 2023 from https://unstats.un.org/
sdgs/indicators/Global%20Indicator%20Framework%20after%20reﬁnement_Eng.pdf
UN (2015) Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. United Nations.
A/RES/70/1. Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 25 September 2015. Accessed 5
June 2023 from https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld/public
ation
UN (2023) Progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals: Towards a Rescue Plan for People
and Planet. Accessed 5 June 2023 from https://sdgs.un.org/sites/default/ﬁles/2023-04/SDG_Pro
gress_Report_Special_Edition_2023_ADVANCE_UNEDITED_VERSION.pdf
Ecotourism: The Concept
and the Practice of Sustainability Within
Tourism
Cláudia Toriz Ramos and Allison Margaret Byrne
Abstract Sustainability is a challenge for tourism since it often implies travel-
ling and high levels of consumption. As a concept, sustainable tourism envisions a
major change: making tourism compatible with environmental sustainability without
hindering both the economic and the social beneﬁts it brings. It is therefore about
introducing a third arm of positive impacts, which are environmental impacts.
Tourism thus becomes an interesting focal point in a sustainability research agenda,
due to the opportunity it creates for testing the possibilities of convergence between
the economic, the social and the environmental pillars of sustainability. Ecotourism
is a particular type of tourism and, given its speciﬁcities, a privileged ﬁeld for
testing sustainability, whether ‘strong’ or ‘weak’. The chapter has two main foci: the
genesis and conceptual contours of ecotourism within sustainable tourism and policy-
oriented practices, standardisation and benchmarking in sustainability. Additionally,
a selection of cases in ecotourism are presented in brief, in order to characterise
ecotourism as a ﬁeld for the sustainability research agenda.
Keywords Ecotourism · Sustainable tourism · Nature tourism · Conservation ·
Ecological standards
C. T. Ramos (B)
Faculty of Human and Social Sciences. CEPESE, Universidade Fernando Pessoa, Praça 9 de
Abril, 349, 4249-004 Porto, Portugal
e-mail: cramos@ufp.edu.pt
URL: https://www.cienciavitae.pt/portal/111B-1919-E6A0
A. M. Byrne
Escola Superior de Saúde. Universidade Fernando Pessoa, Praça 9 de Abril, 349, 4249-004 Porto,
Portugal
e-mail: abyrne@ufp.edu.pt
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_5
73
74
C. T. Ramos and A. M. Byrne
1
Introduction
Sustainability is a major challenge for tourism, since it often implies travelling and
elevated levels of consumption. Tourism is therefore an interesting focal point in a
sustainability research agenda (Leal Filho et al. 2018; McCool and Bosak 2019),
because of the opportunity it creates for testing the possibilities of balancing the
economic, the social and the environmental pillars of sustainability (Purvis et al.
2019). Tourism impacts all three levels: as economic activity; as a generator of
jobs, wealth and well-being; and as a consumer-driven activity, normally associated
with high levels of consumption, and thus a depletor of natural resources. Whether
coupling tourism with sustainability is possible at all and, if so, whether from a
‘strong’ sustainability perspective (i.e., one that does not compromise the environ-
mental pillar to beneﬁt the other two), or solely from a rather ‘weak sustainability’
standpoint, as put forward in the debate that emerged in environmental economics,
years ago (cf. Ayres et al. 2001), are the paramount questions for a sustainability
research agenda on tourism.
Ecotourism, as further discussed below, is a speciﬁc type of tourism and an inter-
esting ﬁeld for testing the conditions of this balance. Its conservation approach, its
insertion within local communities, and its small scale, all contribute to providing
an economic activity guided by environmental concerns but also bearing substantial
positive social impacts. However, such an approach is hardly compatible with the
scale of present- day tourism, and thus may remain very limited in scope (Fennell
2020; TIES 2019).
For tourism, standardisation and benchmarking have also become assessment
techniques of sustainability performance, both at the level of policy analysis and
for businesses. Available tools, as further illustrated in the text, provide for statis-
tics and comparison. These instruments can also serve a research agenda on the
sustainability of tourism by providing standardised and comparative data (GSTC
2022b). Furthermore, tourism, and ecotourism in particular, encompasses different
types of stakeholders: from tourism operators to the many agents of the local commu-
nities, and the tourists themselves, who are the clients, but who can also perform as
self-aware ecotourists. The interaction between all these stakeholders substantially
contributes to the outcome of the ‘industry’, in terms of its sustainability goals, and
thus constitutes yet another ﬁeld of research.
This chapter aims to frame the discussion on sustainable tourism as a focal point
in a sustainability research agenda and, within this, undertakes the speciﬁc objective
of analysing ecotourism, namely its standardisation, in order to hypothesise whether
it can showcase a strong sustainability approach to tourism; if so, then the model
might be replicated for other types of tourist activities.
After this initial section, the chapter is divided in four main parts. The next section
analyses the genesis and conceptual contours of ecotourism, as a type of sustainable
tourism. The third part considers policy-oriented practices, standards and bench-
marking in sustainable tourism, and provides examples from organisations at the
global level, but with a special focus on the European Union (EU) regional level.
Ecotourism: The Concept and the Practice of Sustainability Within Tourism
75
The EU is a global leader in environmental policies, but it is also a regional organisa-
tion that brings together countries for whom tourism represents an important socio-
economic factor. EU efforts, therefore, to foster sustainable tourism, balancing strin-
gent environmental protection policies with industry interests, make it an interesting
focus of study. The fourth section covers case studies in ecotourism. These exem-
plify how the sustainability approach is being applied in the niche of ecotourism. The
chapter ends with some concluding remarks, leading to a proposal on how ecotourism
and sustainable tourism can contribute to the sustainability research agenda.
2
Ecotourism: Conceptualisation
Ecotourism occupies a speciﬁc niche within tourism, and one that is prone to create
enhanced conditions for sustainable practices. Ecotourism is normally considered as
‘nature-based’ tourism.
As early as 2002, the Québec Declaration on Ecotourism (UNWTO 2002) stated
that a number of speciﬁc principles distinguish ecotourism from the broader perspec-
tive of sustainable tourism: namely the conservation and interpretation of natural
and cultural heritage, the involvement of local or indigenous communities and the
tendencytobringtogethereitherindependenttravellersororganisedbutsmallgroups.
Many deﬁnitions have meanwhile been offered but not all of them have delim-
ited the exact same object. Fennell (2020), after comparing the most relevant of
these, highlights the core ideas they all address: (i) their nature-based foundation;
(ii) sustainability and conservation; (iii) the human dimension as local participation
and beneﬁts; (iv) learning and education; and (v) the ethical imperative. He therefore
deﬁnes ecotourism as:
Travel with a primary interest in the natural history of a destination. It is a non-invasive
and participatory form of nature-based tourism that is built around learning, sustain-
ability (conservation and local participation beneﬁts) and ethical planning, development
and management (Fennell 2020: 14).
In turn, The International Ecotourism Society deﬁnes ecotourism as: “responsible
travel to natural areas that conserves the environment, sustains the well-being of the
local people, andinvolves interpretationandeducation”(TIES 2019: n/p). TheGlobal
Ecotourism Network (GEN 2022) provides a very similar deﬁnition.
TIES emphasises that Ecotourism is about bringing together conservation,
communities, and sustainable travel, and identiﬁes the following ecotourism princi-
ples:
•
Minimize physical, social, behavioural, and psychological impacts.
•
Build environmental and cultural awareness and respect.
•
Provide positive experiences for both visitors and hosts.
•
Provide direct ﬁnancial beneﬁts for conservation.
•
Generate ﬁnancial beneﬁts for both local people and private industry.
76
C. T. Ramos and A. M. Byrne
•
Deliver memorable interpretative experiences to visitors that help raise sensitivity to host
countries’ political, environmental, and social climates.
•
Design, construct and operate low-impact facilities.
•
Recognize the rights and spiritual beliefs of the Indigenous People in your community
and work in partnership with them to create empowerment (TIES 2019: n/p)
All the perspectives outlined provide information on the object—natural areas
and, in some deﬁnitions, also cultural heritage; on the travelling and accommodation
infrastructures—which should be low-impact; on the type of activities—non intru-
sive, prone to conservation and interpretation; on the tourism operators—expected to
be deeply rooted in the local community and generating positive ﬁnancial and other
outcomes for the latter; on the tourists themselves—small scale and with a speciﬁc
interest in nature and local life; on ethics—which are the ethics of conservation and
education for natural and cultural heritage.
The formula thus achieved is very demanding and sets serious limits to the tourist
activity, even beyond what conventional deﬁnitions on sustainable tourism might
require. The United Nations World Tourism Organisation (UNWTO n.d.) deﬁnes
sustainable tourism as “Tourism that takes full account of its current and future
economic, social and environmental impacts, addressing the needs of visitors, the
industry, the environment and host communities”, i.e., using a rather general formula
on sustainability.
However, even within ecotourism, there may be variation in terms of the scope of
sustainability attained. Fennell differentiates ‘soft’ and ‘hard’ ecotourism, meaning
that softer versions require “mechanised transport, easy accessibility and a high level
of services” (Fennell 2020: 21), which of course have an increased environmental
impact.
Transport remains very much an unsolved issue when it comes to ﬁtting tourism
into the boundaries of sustainability (Gale and Hill 2016). Travelling inevitably
carries an environmental footprint, hence the only thing to do is to lower its negative
impacts (Hunter 2016). Walking, or travelling by bike, especially for medium to
long distances is simply not feasible. Means of transport relying on green mobility
(from electric cars to travelling by train) are increasingly available but there is still
a long way to go in order to couple efﬁciency with price and availability. Locally,
however, ecotourism may indeed welcome traditional non pollutant means of trans-
port. Accessibility may nevertheless be compromised, which further increases the
niche characteristic of this sector of activity.
With reference to the object, it is also worth drawing a clear line between
ecotourism and coterminous concepts such as nature-based tourism, wildlife tourism,
or cultural tourism (Fennell 2020; Gale and Hill 2016; Jackson 2022). Many forms
of nature-based tourism (i.e., tourism relying on the natural characteristics of the
destination, such as seaside spots or mountains) do not comply with the deﬁnitions
of ecotourism and are indeed quite close to mass tourism, as in the case of cruises
or exploration safaris. Adventure tourism is yet another close concept but does not
entirely overlap with ecotourism (Amici et al. 2022). Furthermore, greenwashing or
Ecotourism: The Concept and the Practice of Sustainability Within Tourism
77
environmental opportunism may emerge in the promotional language of some opera-
tors,andthusblurthelinebetweenwhatisandwhatisnotecotourism.Inturn,cultural
and heritage tourism are also broader than ecotourism, which seems to address
culture, but only as an interpretive framework of nature and the local communities’
interactions with it. Besides, cultural and heritage tourism are often connected with
mass tourism (Koščak and O’Rourke 2023). Some of the literature draws a connec-
tion between ecotourism and indigenous or aboriginal tourism (Lemelin and Blangy
2009). The principles of minimal impact, awareness and respect aim at providing
conditions for learning without disturbing the host communities, whether human or
natural ecosystems. The rewilding movement (Hall 2019; Rewilding Europe 2023),
for instance, does introduce a contradiction with this principle.
The ecotourist is also of a different ‘species’ compared with the ordinary tourist.
Fennell (2020) states that ecotourists differ from other types of tourists in their
motivations, expectations and behaviours. They are close to naturalists and prone to
nature observation, ranging from botany to geology or zoology. The hard-liners tend
to be rather independent, or possibly specialised, as in the case of scientiﬁc groups.
Nonetheless, there is also the casual ecotourist, who may have been introduced to
it by means of organised tours, and who is possibly expecting a certain amount
of service. Weaver (2005), distinguishes between ‘hard’ and ‘soft’ ecotourists and
Beall and Boley (2022) propose a scale development exercise, in order to differentiate
ecotourists from non-ecotourists.
For the tourism operators, remaining within ecotourism standards is also a major
challenge, not least in terms of the ﬁnancial viability of the projects (Neger 2022).
From the infrastructures, to consumables, they are expected to respect the orig-
inal balance with nature, while providing a good service for tourists and delivering
ﬁnancial beneﬁts for themselves and the local community. Agrotourism, for instance,
provides good opportunities to improve the income of small farmers or rural commu-
nities, while allowing the tourist to participate in community routines (harvesting for
example). Yet again, the concept does not fully overlap with ecotourism (Little and
Blau 2020). One possible way of dealing with deﬁnitional problems is standardi-
sation and certiﬁcation, as further addressed below, which provide both rules and
incentives for entrepreneurs and public (Jackson 2022).
To sum up: the deﬁnition of ecotourism adopted for the purposes of this text
is in line with the vision provided by TIES (2019) and by Fennell (2020), i.e.,
discarding similar, but broader and looser deﬁnitions of ecotourism and cotermi-
nous concepts. The focus on natural areas (with cultural heritage as a subsidiary
factor only, the emphasis on sustainable travel and accommodation, the importance
of positive but sustainable returns to the local community, the observation and conser-
vation focus and the principle of learning without disturbing, coupled with the ethical
responsibility of the tourists themselves deﬁne the core issues covered by a coherent
ecotourism concept.
78
C. T. Ramos and A. M. Byrne
3
Policy-Oriented Practices, Standardisation
and Benchmarking in Sustainable Tourism
Ecotourism is not speciﬁcally mentioned in the sustainable development goals
(SDG), nor in their related targets and indicators. Only tourism in general is
mentioned (UNGA 2017). As for many other human activities, it is commonly
accepted that tourism bears a relation with several of the goals, or even with all
of them, as stated in the Tourism4SDGS Platform: Tourism has the potential to
contribute, directly or indirectly to all of the goals (Tourism4SDGS n.d.; UNWTO
n.d.). However, that connection is more obvious for some goals than for others; in a
number of cases, the SDG agenda speciﬁcally mentions tourism, as shown in Fig. 1.
Tourism has an evident link with SDG 8, “Decent work and economic growth”,
since it is an economic activity. Moreover, it generates substantial income for both
developed and developing countries and is also a sector that includes many small
and medium size companies, thereby being deeply rooted in the local life of the host
communities. The focus on promoting “sustainable tourism that creates jobs and
promotes local culture and products” clearly aims to reinforce that local dimension
and also aligns with the niche within which ecotourism stands. The indicators deﬁned
for this target also highlight the economic (GDP and jobs) importance of tourism.
The same occurs with SDG 12, “Sustainable consumption and production”, which
mentions as a target the development of “tools to monitor sustainable development
impacts for sustainable tourism”. The target is therefore assessed on the basis of
the quantitative measurement of “strategies, policies and implemented action plans”
submitted to sustainability monitoring and evaluation tools. Lastly, SDG 14, with
reference to “the sustainable use of oceans and marine resources”, also includes
sustainable tourism, within the strategies to develop “small island developing States
and least developed countries” (UNGA 2017).
Goals
Targets
Indicators
SDG 8 
“Decent work 
and economic 
growth” 
“By 2030, devise and implement 
policies to promote sustainable tourism 
that creates jobs and promotes local 
culture and products.” 
“8.9.1 Tourism direct GDP as a 
proportion of total GDP and in growth 
rate; 8.9.2 Proportion of jobs in 
sustainable tourism industries out of total 
tourism jobs.” [monitored by UNWTO]
SDG 12 
“Sustainable 
consumption 
and 
production”
“12.b: Develop and implement tools to 
monitor sustainable development impacts 
for sustainable tourism that creates jobs 
and promotes local culture and 
products.”
“12.b.1: Number of sustainable tourism 
strategies or policies and implemented 
action plans with agreed monitoring and 
evaluation tools.” 
[monitored by UNWTO]
SDG 14 “The 
sustainable 
use of oceans 
and marine 
resources” 
“14.7: By 2030, increase the economic 
benefits to small island developing States 
and least developed countries from the 
sustainable use of marine resources, 
including through sustainable 
management of fisheries, aquaculture 
and tourism.”
____
Fig. 1 Tourism in the SDG agenda. Source UNGA (2017)
Ecotourism: The Concept and the Practice of Sustainability Within Tourism
79
The general conclusion therefore is that the SDG agenda considers tourism as
having the potential to incorporate sustainability standards of an economic, social
and environmental nature. In order to operationalise this, UNWTO (2023) is working
on the preparation of statistical tools for Measuring the Sustainability of Tourism
(MST). Criteria for identifying sustainable tourism have also been deﬁned by the
Global Sustainable Tourism Council (2022a). The deﬁnition emerged from the 2007
joint initiative to adopt universal sustainable tourism principles by the Rainforest
Alliance, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the United Nations
Foundation (UN Foundation), and the United Nations World Tourism Organization
(UNWTO). It is now an independent organisation which establishes global standards
for sustainable travel and tourism, known as the GSTC Criteria (for industry and for
destination). The GTS destination Criteria in the 2019 version already identiﬁed
performance indicators with the relevant SDGs (GSTC 2019).
If we look at the European Union (EU) example, and search for tourism as policy
area, the activity is also more immediately visible in the economic sector than in
the environmental sector. As an economic activity, tourism falls under the actions
to support, coordinate or supplement the actions of the Member States (articles 6
and 195, TFEU), i.e., leaving substantial autonomy to EU Member States. Tourism
is quite important in Europe: for its volume, but also as a tool for the development
of Member States lagging behind EU averages. However, from the environmental
angle, the EU is ambitious and runs a common (and therefore binding) policy, and
one, moreover, that sets the sustainability bar quite high (Jordan and Gravey 2021).
The legal framework is deﬁned under articles 11 and 191–193 of the TFEU, which
provide the EU with broad competences.
Recently, the EU approved its “European Climate Law” (Regulation (EU) 2021/
1119) as a follow-up of the Commission’s “European Green Deal” plan of 2019,
and which sets a target of climate neutrality by 2050, and an intermediate target of
a 55% reduction of gas emissions by 2030. These ambitious goals inevitably impact
tourism and that is why, coupled with the strategic importance of the sector for the
Europeans, the EU has focused on providing guidance for a sustainable transition to
happen also within tourism activities. For the purpose, the Commission has set up
a roadmap which includes, inter alia: measures for smart and sustainable mobility;
eco-labelling for tourist destinations; an Eco-Management and Audit Scheme; energy
efﬁciency; sustainable use of natural resources; the circularity of tourism services
(e.g. use of local ingredients; reduction of food waste); protection of biodiversity;
environmental education for operators and for tourists; and a EU Tourism Dashboard
for measuring the ecological footprint of a given destination (European Commission
2022). Below is a brief analysis of some of these tools.
The Eco-Management and Audit Scheme (EMAS) dates back to 1993 (Council
Regulation (EEC) Nº 1836/1993) and originally aimed at creating a community
eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS) based on the voluntary participation
of organisations. In the 2009 update (Regulation (EC) Nº 1221/2009), Article 46
also established the necessity to develop Sectoral Reference Documents (SRD),
which the European Commission did for tourism, in 2016 (Commission Decision
80
C. T. Ramos and A. M. Byrne
BEMPs
Examples *
“for destination management”
Development planning and conservation measures;
provision of services to cope with peak season tourist 
demands.
“for tour operators and travel agents”
Collaboration with destination managers; optimisation 
of transport to reduce emissions; accommodation eco-
efficiency improvement; marketing.
“to minimise energy consumption in 
accommodation establishments”
Improvement of thermal insulation; of HVAC systems;
of lighting efficiency; use of renewable energies.
“to minimise water consumption in 
accommodation establishments”
System monitoring and maintenance; improvement of
laundry processes; of landscaping and irrigation; of
swimming pools; use of greywater.
“to minimise and manage waste in 
accommodation establishments”
Waste minimisation; onsite sorting and recycling;
wastewater treatment.
“for food & drink providers”
Efficient procurement and management of food; waste
management; efficient cooking.
Fig. 2 Best environmental management practices for tourism in the EU. Source Adapted from
Commission Decision (EU) 2016/611 of 15 April 2016, pp. 34–35 and *European Commission
(n.d.)
(EU) 2016/611 of 15 April 2016). The SRDs are expected to include Best Envi-
ronmental Management Practices (BEMPs), Environmental Performance Indicators
and, if applicable, Benchmarks of Excellence and rating systems identifying perfor-
mance levels and best performers. Hence, the 2016 document, after identifying key
environmental pressures impending over tourism related activities, deﬁnes seven
areas of BEMPs (Fig. 2).
The impact of this audit scheme upon tourism and tourism related activities
is difﬁcult to access in quantitative terms, given the complexity of tourism as an
industrial ecosystem which encompasses many sectors of economic activity (Euro-
pean Commission, DG Internal Market 2022: 2). Even so, in 2020, the European
Commission (European Commission, DG Environment 2020: 3) highlighted that
EMAS registered 177 entries in the sector of accommodation activities, 71 in the
food service activities, and 77 in the arts, entertainment and recreation sector (results
from 2018). It further pointed out that nearly 95% of those were actually small and
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). While these numbers are not high in terms of the
dimension of the sector in the EU, they nevertheless bear witness to an emergent
awareness on environmental auditing and potential beneﬁts.
Ecolabelling may be one such advantage. Labelling supports both the consumers
and the professionals in the sector, as it deﬁnes sine qua non criteria for certiﬁcation
and can provide a catalogue of certiﬁed destinations. The involvement of both ends of
the process is crucial and, indeed, consumers’ attitudes and choices make a difference
when it comes to sustainability. In the EU, legislation was passed (Commission
Decision 2023) deﬁning the criteria for the ‘EU Ecolabel tourist accommodation’.
This EU Ecolabel is in accordance with ISO Ecolabelling standards, as set out in
ISO 14024: 2018 Type I. Environmental labels and declarations (ISO 2023).
Another interesting EU tool for the tourist industry, for consumers, and also
for policy makers is the ‘Tourist Dashboard’, as developed since 2021 (European
Commissionn.d.).Initiallyaproofofconceptitisnowopentothepublicandprovides
Ecotourism: The Concept and the Practice of Sustainability Within Tourism
81
relevant information on European destinations (at country and, where possible, also at
regional and sub-regional levels) according to several indicators distributed by three
pillars (or policy areas): environmental impacts, digitalisation, and socio-economic
vulnerability. Environmental impacts are measured according to the following indi-
cators: air travel emission intensity; tourism GHG intensity; tourism energy intensity;
share of trips by train; excellent bathing water; dependence on distant origins.
4
Ecotourism: A Special Niche?
According to the deﬁnition of ecotourism presented above, efforts for standardis-
ation and benchmarking can make a difference in actually deﬁning and delimiting
ecotourist initiatives, and at the same time making them known to the public.
General information on ecotourism states that it is fast growing and is therefore an
expanding area in the tourism business (Jackson 2022). Despite the opportunities it
may provide, the fact is not necessarily good news for the sub-sector, especially for its
‘small scale’ characteristic, but also because of the difﬁculties in reaching consensus
on what is and what is not ecotourism. More often than not, it seems there is a grey
area between sustainable tourism and ecotourism, which may result in a ‘distorted’
use of the label ‘ecotourism’. These problems obviously impact on the efforts to
standardise and certify ecotourism. Moreover, the assessment of its effectiveness in
the promotion of sustainable development is at least debatable (Wondirad 2019).
Hence, for a systematic research agenda, a good research question will address the
deﬁnition of the criteria to be taken into account, in order to identify and assess
ecotourism practices and outcomes. The broader natural, human and institutional
contexts are also relevant. Examples of ongoing cases are brieﬂy analysed below.
The ﬁrst case is an EU case, the InterregMED Programme—DestiMED Plus
Project (DestiMED PLUS 2023). This is a project within the Interreg Euro-MED
Programme, which is an EU cooperation structure across Mediterranean borders.
The DestiMED Plus aims at developing ecotourism in Mediterranean protected areas
by bringing together nine Mediterranean regions that want to promote ecotourism
in their protected areas. The project builds on the previous experience and results of
the Mediterranean Experience of Ecotourism (MEET 2023) and DestiMED project
(DestiMED 2019).
The Mediterranean is a highly signiﬁcant geographical space for this debate, since
it is also a favourite destination for mass tourism, which is a challenge for Protected
Areas (PAs), and therefore one where conﬂicting interests between the conservation
and tourism sectors may emerge. Hence, the plan aims at bringing together conserva-
tion and tourism policies, resorting to the tools previously developed for MEET, and
further developing a methodology for measuring and monitoring impacts of tourism.
The MEET network was created in 2018 as a follow up to a project initiated in 2013
by a group of conservation and tourism organisations aiming at bridging the gap
between tourism and conservation in the Mediterranean area (MEET 2023). Under
the DestiMed project they developed a manual for that purpose (MEET 2019). At
82
C. T. Ramos and A. M. Byrne
present, MEET and DestiMED Plus provide an Ecotourism Standard and an online
Ecological Footprint Calculator, both included in the online indicator monitoring
platform (MEET n.d.). The Ecological Footprint Calculator measures and analyses
the ecological footprint of an ecotourism itinerary, in line with the criteria established
by the Global Footprint Network (GFN 2023; Mancini et al. 2018, 2022). The Indi-
cator Monitoring Platform provides tourism destinations in protected areas with a
self-assessment tool, aligned with the criteria of the MEET Standard, which is being
updated in the framework of the DestiMED Plus project (a draft version is available
online).
In 2022, a DestiMED Plus report highlighted some very important conclusions on
the ecological footprint measured over the course of the project in the nine Mediter-
ranean protected areas. First, it shows that the footprint of ecotourism is lower than
that of mass tourism (if medium and long-distance travelling are not considered).
Besides, in some cases, the ecological footprint of the tourists at the destination
was even lower than that of local residents. Travelling remains the key issue for
lowering the ecological footprint of tourism and, consequently, proximity tourism
is recommendable (DestiMED Plus 2022). For the EU, these projects are also very
important as tools for testing the viability of alternative forms of tourism bearing a
much smaller impact upon natural resources.
The second example is a non-European example. It is ECO Certiﬁcation by
Ecotourism Australia, which appears to be a realistic effort to create a scale leading
from very basic requirements of ecotourism to more ‘advanced’ versions (Ecotourism
Australia 2023a).
It was launched in 1996 and is now a certiﬁcation programme recognised by the
Global Sustainable Tourism Council (2022b). What this programme provides is the
certiﬁcation of tourism products with a primary focus on nature. For the consumer,
it means that the certiﬁed products carry a strong commitment to sustainability and a
guarantee of genuine nature-based tourism experiences. As explained in the instruc-
tions for candidates (Ecotourism Australia 2023b), ECO certiﬁcation “is product-
speciﬁc”, which means that applicants “can apply for Certiﬁcation even if not all of
[their] products are nature-based”. This is also a step-by-step certiﬁcation procedure.
There are three levels: “nature tourism”, “ecotourism”, and “advanced ecotourism”.
Beyond these, but also with a connection to the fundamentals of ecotourism, the same
organisation also runs the “Respecting Our Culture (ROC)” certiﬁcation programme,
with reference to Indigenous communities and their cultural heritage. Requirements
therefore go from simpler versions to more complex ones, thus creating a scale
associated with certiﬁcation (p. 14) as explained in Fig. 3.
For preparingCertiﬁcation, candidates must consider eight sections, eachof which
considers a dense list of indicators. The sections are: “Business management and
operational planning; Responsible marketing; Customer satisfaction; Environmental
management; Interpretation and education; Contribution to conservation; Working
with local communities; and Cultural respect and sensitivity” (Ecotourism Australia
(2023b: 19).
The next example comes from a developing country. Kenya, which has long
attractedtouristsforthe‘natural’experiencesitoffers,buthardlywithinsustainability
Ecotourism: The Concept and the Practice of Sustainability Within Tourism
83
Types of (Eco) 
Tourism
Ecotourism Australia definitions
(Ecotourism Australia 2023: 8-9) 
Supporting documents for 
application 
(Ecotourism Australia 2023: 14)
Nature Tourism
“Tourism in natural areas that leaves 
minimal impact on the environment” 
“1. Business plan 
2. Marketing plan 
3. Operations plan
4. Environmental plan” 
Ecotourism
“Tourism in a natural area that focuses on 
optimal resources use, leaves minimal 
impact on the environment and offers 
interesting ways to learn about the 
environment with operators that use 
resources wisely, contribute to conserving 
the environment and help local 
communities”
“1. Business plan 
2. Marketing plan 
3. Operations plan
4. Environmental plan 
5. Interpretation plan” 
Advanced 
Ecotourism
“Ecotourism products that operate with 
minimal impact on the environment and 
provide opportunities to learn about the 
environment with operators who are 
committed to achieving best practice, using 
resources wisely, contributing to conserving 
the environment and helping local 
communities”
“1. Business plan 
2. Marketing plan 
3. Operations plan
4. Environmental plan 
5. Interpretation plan
6. Climate change action plan” 
Respecting Our 
Culture (ROC) 
Certification 
program
“[E]ncourages the tourism industry to 
operate in ways that respect and reinforce 
Indigenous cultural heritage and the living 
cultures of Indigenous communities. ROC 
certified tourism operators are committed to 
protecting cultural authenticity and integrity, 
developing sound business practices, 
environmental protection and 
acknowledging Indigenous peoples’ spiritual 
connection to the land and water”
“1. Business plan 
2. Marketing plan 
3. Operations plan
4. Environmental plan 
5. Interpretation plan” 
Fig. 3 TypesofecotourismcertiﬁcationbyEcotourismAustralia.SourceAdaptedfromEcotourism
Australia (2023b)
and conservation patterns, has meanwhile embraced sustainability and ecotourism
standards. Ecotourism Kenya (EK) was created in 1996 and was the ﬁrst ecotourism
society in Africa. It uses as leitmotiv the expression “linking tourism, conservation
and communities” to which end it has established initiatives in different focus areas,
and works in order to produce that outcome. Among its activities, there is the promo-
tion of standards and best practices in tourism. The Eco-rating Certiﬁcation Scheme
was launched in 2002 and is recognised by the Global Sustainable Tourism Council
(GSTC 2022b). It addresses tourism accommodation facilities from the environ-
mental, economic and socio-cultural perspectives, on the basis of set criteria. The
certiﬁcation system provides three graded levels—bronze, silver and gold ecorated—
according to whether tourism facilities have shown awareness, progress or excellence
“in responsible resource use, environmental conservation and socio-economic invest-
ment” (EK 2023a). The organisation also has a strong focus on ‘community devel-
opment’, which is one of the deﬁnitional tenets of ecotourism. As stated in their
website (EK 2023b), the programme aims:
84
C. T. Ramos and A. M. Byrne
1.
To integrate host communities and community-based tourism (CBT) into mainstream
tourism in Kenya;
2.
To build capacity for local people to more effectively engage with tourism issues;
3.
To explore improvement ideas and opportunities for tourism involvements within and
beyond the destinations where the host communities exist.
It is also worth mentioning that Ecotourism Kenya is backing a tour operators
certiﬁcation scheme, therefore entering the difﬁcult issue of travel, from the sustain-
ability point of view. This is also a step-by-step process, tour operators being able to
ﬁrst certify their companies as ‘engaged’ in sustainability; then as ‘partners’, when
complying with increased requirements; and ﬁnally, as ‘certiﬁed’, meaning they
have achieved an internationally recognised pattern of sustainability (EK 2023a).
The assessment of the outcome of this move towards sustainability in African devel-
oping countries has normally produced twofold results, showing progress but also
shortcomings (JoE 2015). The impacts of ecotourism on developing economies thus
deserve further and ongoing research.
The fourth and last example is Costa Rica. This central American country is often
presented as a good case study in sustainability and ecotourism projects, for the
abundance of classiﬁed natural parks (29), wildlife refuges (19), biological reserves
(8), and consequently remarkable biological diversity and geological landscapes
(Amici et al. 2022; Costa Rica Tourism Board 2023).
These natural conditions provide good opportunities for ecotourism, with a strong
emphasis on sustainability, conservation and responsible tourism, as documented by
the National System of Conservation Areas (SINAC-Sistema Nacional de Áreas de
Conservación). SINAC is a governmental agency, under the Ministry of Environ-
ment. Altogether, a quarter of the national territory of Costa Rica is by law under
some category of protection (SINAC n.d.). This also accounts for the substantial
importance of nature tourism in Costa Rica’s GDP, although the pandemic led to a
decline, which is now to be overcome (Oxford Analytica 2022). However, priori-
tising the importance of tourism in the national economy may raise issues as to the
sustainability of the activity from a ‘purely’ ecotourist perspective (Sanchez 2018).
Indeed, the use of the word ‘ecotourism’ seems less established in Costa Rica than
the adherence to the broader concept of sustainability and to sustainability certiﬁ-
cation. The interest and involvement of Costa Rican national governmental entities
with tourism is obvious, and so is their networking with the UNWTO (2017). This
again highlights the importance for the research agenda of governance in sustainable
tourism and ecotourism.
5
Final Considerations
The reasons for including sustainable tourism and ecotourism in an agenda for
sustainable development research would appear to be undeniable.
Ecotourism: The Concept and the Practice of Sustainability Within Tourism
85
Tourism is a complex economic cluster, encompassing several different sectors of
activity. It is important as an economic activity and pivotal in development processes.
It is also an activity where SMEs abound, which brings it closer to the community,
and to participation mechanisms and education and learning skills.
Furthermore, it enjoys a special relationship with the clients, i.e., the tourists. The
tourist is also responsible for ethical tourism and can choose, learn, and participate in
localprocesses.Hencetheactivityisbidirectional,andsustainabilitycanbeimproved
also from that point of view.
Ecotourism represents a very speciﬁc challenge for sustainable tourism. Its
grounding in nature-related tourism, in preservation and conservation, in observa-
tion and learning, in communitarian life and minimal impacts, make it a test case
for ‘hard’ sustainability in tourism. If achieved, ecotourism will have proved its rele-
vance, along with the relevance of tourism for conservation, and will set a benchmark
for sustainable tourism in general. However, none of this has been fully proven to
date. A tension can be identiﬁed between mass- and eco-tourism: concurrent spots,
maximisation of proﬁts, high seasons, even democratisation of the access to culture
and nature. Economic viability, along with medium and long-distance sustainable
transport appear to be the strongest environmental and economic weaknesses of
ecotourism. A step by step (product by product) approach may be more realistic,
allowing some space for ‘soft’ ecotourism, which in turn may help build bridges
with sustainable tourism in general.
The introduction of rigorous concepts, standards and benchmarking is a precious
tool for businesses, but also for science and research, as it enables categorisation,
comparison and ranking. However, at this level, we are still far from full congruence
and are facing a whole universe of diverse standardising tools with little integration
between them, despite the efforts of some organisations in the ﬁeld (e.g., UNWTO,
ISO or the EU) as summarised in this chapter.
The necessity for increased international sustainable tourism governance thus
becomes evident. Nevertheless, and despite the shortcomings, extant work on stan-
dardisation and measurement tools for sustainable tourism and for ecotourism
provide already available and promising research material with which to monitor
sustainability pathways. It is also a task for the research community to compare,
integrate, solidify and consolidate both the deﬁnitions and the research instruments
on sustainable tourism and ecotourism. A vast theoretical and empirical ﬁeld is
therefore opening up before us with every passing day.
Hence, the following agenda for future research, the importance of which the
chapter has aimed to outline, is suggested:
– conceptual research on the standardisation and the integration of extant standards
regarding ‘sustainable tourism’ and ‘ecotourism’, in order to foster conceptual
accuracy and enable comparative research;
– empirical and comparative research on both the advantages and the limitations of
ecotourism in the promotion of sustainable tourism;
– contextual and comparative studies, namely on the natural, human and develop-
ment backgrounds of the cases considered;
86
C. T. Ramos and A. M. Byrne
– a focus on the multilevel structure of governance underlying sustainable tourism
and ecotourism: the role of local, regional, national and international govern-
mental organisations; the speciﬁc role of non-governmental organisations and
local communities;
– a focus on the responsible traveller, on a culture of conservation, learning and
sustainability practices.
The potential for a strong sustainability outcome of ecotourism, one that serves
the broad objective of sustainability in tourism, thus very much remains an open
question, which can only be answered by solid theoretical and empirical research.
References
Amici A, Nadkarni N, Lackey N, Bricker K (2022) Conservation, education, and adventure tourism:
a case study of adventure parks as potential venues for communication in Monteverde, Costa
Rica. J Ecotour 21(3):230–245. https://doi.org/10.1080/14724049.2021.1933503
Analytica O (2022) Costa Rica tourism is on course for recovery. Expert Brieﬁngs. https://doi.org/
10.1108/OXAN-DB271411
Ayres RU, van den Bergh J, Gowdy J (2001) Strong versus weak sustainability: economics, natural
sciences and “Concilience.” Environ Ethics 23(2):155–168
Beall J, Boley B (2022) An ecotourist by whose standards? developing and testing the Ecotourist
Identiﬁcation Scale (EIS). J Ecotour 21(2):99–120. https://doi.org/10.1080/14724049.2021.191
9126
Cardoso A, Abreu Amorim C (2021) European climate law–real changes or postponed
future? UNIO–EU Law J 7(1):138–147. https://doi.org/10.21814/unio.7.1.3574
Costa Rica Tourism Board (2023) Ecotourism. https://www.visitcostarica.com/en/costa-rica/things-
to-do/ecoturism
Commission Decision (EU) 2016/611 of 15 April 2016 on the reference document on best envi-
ronmental management practice, sector environmental performance indicators and benchmarks
of excellence for the tourism sector under Regulation (EC) Nº 1221/2009 on the voluntary
participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and audit scheme (EMAS)
Commission Decision (EU) 2023/705 of 29 March 2023 amending Decisions (EU) 2017/175
and (EU) 2018/680 as regards the energy efﬁciency requirements for EU Ecolabel tourist
accommodation and EU Ecolabel indoor cleaning services for certain energy-related products
Council Regulation (EEC) Nº 1836/93 of 29 June 1993 allowing voluntary participation by
companies in the industrial sector in a Community eco-management and audit scheme
DestiMED (2019) Homepage. https://destimed.interreg-med.eu/
DestiMED PLUS (2022) Ecotourism Impact Report Assessment of the environmental impact of
tourists in DestiMED PLUS project destinations. Project Report. https://static1.squarespace.
com/static/5b07c60a96e76f9f641cdad6/t/6332b4f43908a52f2c1be894/1664267515213/2022-
DestiMED-Plus-Ecotourism-Impact-Report.pdf
DestiMED PLUS (2023) Developing Ecotourism in Mediterranean Protected Areas. https://des
timed-plus.interreg-med.eu/
European Commission, Directorate-General for Environment (2020) EMAS and the tourism sector:
case study, Publications Ofﬁce of the European Union. https://doi.org/10.2779/76398
European Commission, Directorate-General for Environment (2021) The EU ecolabel for tourist
accommodation–The EU ecolabel is the ofﬁcial European Union label for environmental
excellence, Publications Ofﬁce of the European Union. https://doi.org/10.2779/817800
Ecotourism: The Concept and the Practice of Sustainability Within Tourism
87
European Commission, Directorate-General for Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and
SMEs (2022) Transition pathway for tourism. Publications Ofﬁce of the European Union. https://
doi.org/10.2873/344425
Ecotourism Australia (2023a) ECO Certiﬁed Tourism. https://www.ecotourism.org.au/our-certifica
tion-programs/eco-certification
Ecotourism Australia (2023b) ECO Certiﬁcation Essentials. https://www.ecotourism.org.au/sites/
ecotourism/media/pdfs/brochures/eco-certification-essentials.pdf
European Commission (n.d.) The reference document for the Tourism sector. https://susproc.jrc.ec.
europa.eu/activities/emas/tourism.html
European Commission (2023) EU Tourism Dashboard. https://tourism-dashboard.ec.europa.eu/bac
kground-methodology?lng=en
EK-Ecotourism Kenya (2023a) Standards & Best Practices. https://ecotourismkenya.org/blog/por
tfolio-item/standards-best-practices/
EK-Ecotourism Kenya (2023b) Community Development. https://ecotourismkenya.org/blog/portfo
lio-item/community-enterprise-development
Fennell, DA (2020). Ecotourism. Routledge, New York, London
Gale T, Hill J (eds) (2016) Ecotourism and environmental sustainability: principles and practice.
Routledge, London. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315578767-2
GEN-Global Ecotourism Network (2022) Deﬁnition and Key Concepts. https://www.globalecotou
rismnetwork.org/definition-and-key-concepts/
GFN-Global Footprint Network (2023) Ecological Footprint. https://www.footprintnetwork.org/
our-work/ecological-footprint/
GSTC-Global Sustainable Tourism Council (2019) GSTC Destination Criteria. Version 2. 06
December 2019, with Performance indicators and SDGs. https://www.gstcouncil.org/wp-con
tent/uploads/GSTC-Destination-Criteria-v2.0-with-SDGs.pdf
GSTC-Global Sustainable Tourism Council (2022a) GSTC Criteria Overview. https://www.gstcou
ncil.org/gstc-criteria/
GSTC-Global Sustainable Tourism Council (2022b) GSTC Recognized Standards. https://www.gst
council.org/gstc-criteria/gstc-recognized-standards/
Hall CM (2019) Tourism and rewilding: an introduction–deﬁnition, issues and review. J Ecotour
18(4):297–308. https://doi.org/10.1080/14724049.2019.1689988
Hunter C (2016) Thinking globally about ecotourism impact: The contribution of ecological foot-
print analysis. In: Gale T, Hill J (eds) Ecotourism and environmental sustainability: principles
and practice. Routledge, London, pp 31–48
ISO (2023) ISO 14024:2018. Environmental labels and declarations. Type I environmental
labelling–Principles and procedures. https://www.iso.org/standard/72458.html
Jackson G (2022) Ecotourism. In: Environmental science. Oxford Research Encyclopaedia of
Environmental Science. https://doi.org/10.1093/acrefore/9780199389414.013.378
JoE (2015) Special issues: ecotourism in africa thirty years Later. J Ecotour 14(2–3). https://www.
tandfonline.com/toc/reco20/14/2-3
Jordan A, Gravey V (2021) Environmental policy in the EU. Actors, institutions and processes. 4th
edn. Routledge, London. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429402333
Koščak M, O’Rourke T (2023) Cultural and Heritage Tourism–a potential for local sustainable
tourism and development? In: Koščak M, O’Rourke T (eds) Ethical and responsible tourism:
managing sustainability in local tourism destinations. Routledge, London, pp 44–59
Leal Filho W, Azeiteiro U, Alves F, Pace P, Mifsud M, Brandli L, Caeiro SS, Disterheft A (2018)
Reinvigorating the sustainable development research agenda: the role of the sustainable devel-
opment goals (SDG). Int J Sust Dev World 25(2):131–142. https://doi.org/10.1080/13504509.
2017.1342103
Lemelin R, Blangy S (2009) Introduction to the special issue on aboriginal ecotourism. J Ecotour
8(2):77–81. https://doi.org/10.1080/14724040902730581
88
C. T. Ramos and A. M. Byrne
Little M, Blau E (2020) Social adaptation and climate mitigation through agrotourism: a case study
of tourism in Mastatal, Costa Rica. J Ecotour 19(2):97–112. https://doi.org/10.1080/14724049.
2019.1652305
Mancini M, Evans M, Iha K, Danelutti C, Galli A (2018) Assessing the ecological footprint of
ecotourism packages: a methodological proposition. Resources 7(2):38. https://doi.org/10.3390/
resources7020038
Mancini M et al (2022) Ecological footprint and tourism: development and sustainability monitoring
of ecotourism packages in mediterranean protected areas. J Outdoor Recreat Tour 38:100513.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jort.2022.100513
McCool SF, Bosak K (2019) A Research agenda for sustainable tourism. Edward Elgar Pub,
Cheltenham
MEET-Mediterranean Experience of Ecotourism (n.d.) MEET Ecotourism Standard. https://www.
meetnetwork.org/monitoring-platform
MEET-Mediterranean Experience of Ecotourism (2019) MEET Manual. A guide to plan and
promote ecotourism activities and measure their impacts in Mediterranean Protected Areas
following the MEET approach. https://static1.squarespace.com/static/5b07c60a96e76f9f641cd
ad6/t/5db2fd4c98002f2cfe53a030/1572011372292/MEET_manual_2019.pdf
MEET-Mediterranean Experience of Ecotourism (2023) Homepage. https://www.meetnetwork.org/
Neger C (2022) Ecotourism in crisis: an analysis of the main obstacles for the sector’s economic
sustainability. J Ecotour 21(4):311–333. https://doi.org/10.1080/14724049.2021.1942019
Purvis B, MaoY, Robinson D (2019) Three pillars of sustainability: in search of conceptual origins.
Sustainy Sci 14:681–695. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-018-0627-5
Rewilding Europe (2023) Making Europe a wilder place. https://rewildingeurope.com/
Regulation (EC) Nº 1221/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 November
2009 on the voluntary participation by organisations in a Community eco-management and
audit scheme (EMAS), repealing Regulation (EC) Nº 761/2001 and Commission Decisions
2001/681/EC and 2006/193/EC
Regulation (EU) 2021/1119 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 June 2021 estab-
lishing the framework for achieving climate neutrality and amending Regulations (EC) Nº 401/
2009 and (EU) 2018/1999 (‘European Climate Law’)
Sanchez RV (2018) Conservation strategies, protected areas, and ecotourism in Costa Rica. J Park
Recreation Admin 36(3):115–128. https://doi.org/10.18666/JPRA-2018-V36-I3-8355
SINAC-Sistema Nacional de Áreas de Conservación (n.d.) Tourism Program in Wild Protected
Areas. https://www.sinac.go.cr/EN-US/turismo/Pages/conosturis.aspx)
TFEU-Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. http://data.europa.eu/eli/treaty/tfeu_2
012/oj
TIES-The International Ecotourism Society (2019) What is Ecotourism? https://ecotourism.org/
what-is-ecotourism/
Tourism4SDGS (n.d.) Tourism for SDGs. A Platform developed by UNWTO. https://tourism4sdgs.
org/
UNGA-United Nations General Assembly (2017) Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on
6 July 2017. A/RES/71/313
UNWTO-United Nations World Tourism Organisation (n.d.a) Sustainable Development. https://
www.unwto.org/sustainable-development
UNWTO-United Nations World Tourism Organisation (n.d.b) Tourism in the 2030 Agenda. https://
www.unwto.org/tourism-in-2030-agenda
UNWTO-United Nations World Tourism Organisation (2023) Measuring the Sustainability of
Tourism. https://www.unwto.org/tourism-statistics/measuring-sustainability-tourism
UNWTO-United Nations World Tourism Organisation (2002) Québec Declaration on Ecotourism.
UNWTO Declarations 12(2), UNWTO, Madrid. https://doi.org/10.18111/unwtodeclarations.
2002.12.02
UNWTO-United Nations World Tourism Organisation (2017) UNWTO names president of Costa
Rica as special ambassador of the international year of sustainable tourism for development.
Ecotourism: The Concept and the Practice of Sustainability Within Tourism
89
10 May 2017. https://www.unwto.org/archive/global/press-release/2017-05-10/unwto-names-
president-costa-rica-special-ambassador-international-year-sust
Weaver D (2005) Comprehensive and minimalist dimensions of ecotourism. Ann Tour Res
32(2):439–455. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annals.2004.08.003
Wondirad A (2019) Does ecotourism contribute to sustainable destination development, or is it
just a marketing hoax? Analyzing twenty-ﬁve years contested journey of ecotourism through a
meta-analysis of tourism journal publications. Asia Pac J Tour Res 24(11):1047–1065. https://
doi.org/10.1080/10941665.2019.1665557
Cláudia Toriz Ramos I am an Associate Professor of Political Science and International Rela-
tions at the Faculty of Human and Social Sciences of University Fernando Pessoa and a member
of CEPESE (Centre for Political Economic and Social Studies), an R&D unit at the same univer-
sity.I hold a Ph.D. in Political Science from the University of Aberdeen. My research interests
cover European integration, parliaments and democracy and structures of global and interna-
tional governance, namely in the ﬁelds of democratisation, international security, ecopolitics and
sustainability.
Allison Margaret Byrne I am an English lecturer at the School of Health, University Fernando
Pessoa. My qualiﬁcations include an MSc. in Information Technology from the University of
the West of England and a B.A. Hons in Portuguese from the University of London, King’s
College. I belong to the Behavioural and Social Sciences Research Centre (FP-B2S) and the LACI
Neuroscience Group, both R&D units at University Fernando Pessoa. Research interests include
language development, language learning and production, as well as translation.
Rewilding the Cajun Prairie: Efforts
in Land Rehabilitation Ensure
a Sustainable Future in Southwestern
Louisiana and Beyond
M. F. Vidrine, B. Borsari, M. Pastorek, and C. M. Allen
Abstract Before European settlement, the prairie ecosystem (Cajun Prairie) of
southwestern Louisiana covered an estimated area of more than one million hectares.
The landscape of this region, Acadiana, was converted into farmland, oil infrastruc-
ture, and urbanscape. Estimated areas are destroyed (99.9%); the remaining 1,500
hectares (0.1%) persist in degraded states. We elaborate upon knock-on negative
regional impacts. Restoring the ecological integrity of prairies with native plants is
proposed in this work, as a viable approach to sustainable development and a research
agenda, which is urgently needed to ensure a sustainable future. Our evaluation study
considered a selection of case studies to present achievements and challenges at rewil-
ding in this region at various times and scales. Our report includes 1,349.3 hectares
of prairie under restoration. The data were triangulated with qualitative data derived
from a systematic literature review and quantitative data from estimates of hectares
that were reclaimed into prairie during the last forty years. This assessment enabled
us to quantify the values of these efforts for Acadiana. Implications for adoptions and/
or adaptations to rewilding in other regions of the world are presented in a distinc-
tive holistic model, which appears in the conclusion section of this manuscript. We
envision multiple beneﬁts in rewilding land on a larger scale to achieve the United
Nations Sustainable Development Goal# 15 (life on land). Using methods resem-
bling those of the American Prairie project, we propose a Cajun Prairie project at the
southern end of the massive prairie ecosystem of the central United States, a region
that has lost its ‘relative ecological integrity.’
M. F. Vidrine
Division of Liberal Arts and Sciences, Louisiana State University Eunice, Eunice, LA 70535, USA
e-mail: mvidrine@lsue.edu
B. Borsari (B)
Department of Biology, Winona State University, Winona, MN 55987, USA
e-mail: bborsari@winona.edu
M. Pastorek
Pastorek Habitats, LLC, 740 Wilson Ct., Grand Junction, CO 81505, USA
C. M. Allen
Native Ventures, LLC, 5070 Hwy 399, Pitkin, LA 70656, USA
e-mail: native@camtel.net
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_6
91
92
M. F. Vidrine et al.
Keywords Acadiana · Biodiversity · Cajun prairie · Ecosystem management ·
Rewilding · Sustainable development · SDG# 15
1
Introduction
Human encroachment on most ecosystems leaves clear evidence of people’s impacts
on wilderness, that since prehistoric times has been shaping the traits of landscapes
on Earth. Many argue that we must reckon with the fact that coexistence with other
species is a necessary condition for the long-term prosperity of ecosystems thus,
‘rewilding’ has surged as an approach for returning the landscapes we have modiﬁed
into wild lands (Foley et al. 2005; Dirzo and Raven 2003; Perino et al. 2019; Freese
2023). The Cajun Prairie exempliﬁes the human alteration of an ecosystem whose
plant community once hosted about 1000 native plant species. It extends from Lake
Charles, LA east to Lafayette, LA along the coastal plain and is part of the coastal
prairie of the Gulf of Mexico (Fig. 1). This region is known as Acadiana, a name
celebrated for its early colonists in the 1700s, the French Acadians (Vidrine et al.
2001a, b). We are extending the effort of the American Prairie by moving into a distant
but connected habitat–one that has lost its ‘relative ecological integrity’ (REI) and
no longer provides many of the ecological resources that it once did (Smith 2001).
While the American Prairie provides a wonderful model, most of the prairie region
of America has already lost its REI and requires a model where restoration precedes
implementationoftheAmericanPrairiemodel–amuch‘heavierlift,’asFreese(2023)
deﬁnes.
The Cajun Prairie ecosystem was essentially a tallgrass prairie dissected by 3
rivers and their riparian forests (Allain et al. 2000). Its primary river is the Mermentau
River, which feeds a large freshwater marsh and saline marsh at its massive delta.
Louisiana has the most extensive surface elevation table-marker horizon strategy,
with a network of stations which is used to quantify the processes affecting wetland
elevation change in the region, because of its rapid rates of wetland loss and sea-level
rise (Osland et al. 2017).
Rich soils in the prairie have literally been eroded by plowing and irrigation,
farming practices that have led to the pollution of rivers via siltation and channel-
ization of the same (Leonard 2017). Consequently, this area is considered the most
biologically-degraded region in Louisiana, yet the most feasible for rewilding—
a process in prairie ecosystems restoration, that apparently is most rapid, when
compared to forests and other systems (Vidrine 2010). With an estimated 99.9% of
the original one-million hectares currently plowed or mowed routinely and otherwise
lost, rewilding is immediately necessary, while native plant propagules remain extant.
This land rehabilitation effort centers around rewilding the prairies and surrounding
environs.
The impacts of the degradation of the land are obvious with nearly every hectare
either routinely mowed or plowed! Consider the following points:
Rewilding the Cajun Prairie: Efforts in Land Rehabilitation Ensure …
93
Fig. 1 The Cajun Prairie (Acadiana) region in southwestern Louisiana. Map prepared by Steven
Dale Nevitt (The Cajun Prairie Habitat Preservation Society)
1. The Cajun Prairie is the most endangered habitat in Louisiana, and prairie is the
most endangered terrestrial habitat in the world. It is essentially extirpated as an
ecological unit, with its biodiversity in ramshackle. In 2020, Brian Sean Early
estimated 1,356 Ha. of the original one million Ha. remained, with circa 81
Ha., along railroad rights of-way and 1,234 Ha. of rangeland, including marsh
fringing remnants—much of this hectarage in some state of degradation, too
(Reﬂections December 2020-The Cajun Prairie and Native Grasses—YouTube
see minute 30). This is a mere 0.1% of the original prairie; 99.9% has been
routinely plowed, mowed or destroyed by other human activities.
2. The bayous (rivers) in the prairie region are dark and muddy. Massive soil losses
from cultivation practices accumulate in our bayous and waterways in the form
of silt. Drainage problems result, and engineers then channel or modify streams
to expedite drainage. Much of the riparian forests were harvested and invaded
by aggressive exotic species, e.g., Chinese Tallow trees (Triadica sebifera).
Remaining forested areas often are pine plantations—farms that don’t function
ecologically, as our typical ecosystems.
3. Every suburban and rural home has a yard, or rather a few thousand square
meters, or more of mowed area. These are deserts for wildlife and we will not
even elaborate here on all of the chemicals being used on lawns.
94
M. F. Vidrine et al.
4. Early workers who studied dragonﬂies (George Bick) and butterﬂies (Edward
Lambremont) noted at the onset of their works back in the 1950s that Acadiana
was an ecological desert, and their time was best spent in any other region of
Louisiana.
5. Local cattle ranching is directly related to mosquito population levels, where
cattle density is directly proportional to mosquito population size in rice-
cultivation areas of the Cajun Prairie (McLaughlin and Vidrine 1987). This
is directly related to the development of parish-wide mosquito-abatement
districts and intensive spraying, which has extirpated local insect diversity and
abundance.
6. Over the years, numerous naturalists who studied birds, ﬁsh, insects,
plants,
etc.,
considered
the
region
to
have
decreasing
populations;
however, large numbers of migrating birds ﬂew through the region.
Globally, wildlife losses estimates since 1970 are nearly 70% in abun-
dance (https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2022/oct/13/almost-70-of-
animal-populations-wiped-out-since-1970-report-reveals-aoe).
7. Large areas in Acadiana (especially Acadia and Jeff Davis Parishes) are
decimated by non-renewable oil extraction developments.
8. Acadiana has a mix of crawﬁsh, rice, soybean, and sugarcane farms, which use
massive amounts of water, fertilizer, biocides, and more agrichemical products.
Plowing and land-levelling are ever-present. The marshes are drained, and every
bayou has been dredged, straightened and/or remodeled for rapid drainage, or
to facilitate boat trafﬁc. Many waterways are man-made canals and lakes.
9. Most homes and commercial properties have a security light. These are now
considered to be a prime trap for beneﬁcial insects. This companioned with
wholesale mosquito spraying create an inhospitable place for invertebrate life
across the agricultural and suburban areas.
10. Acadiana’s farm and urban regions contribute to the size and extent of the dead
zone in the Gulf of Mexico and ﬁsh kills in the rivers and marshes in Gulf
coastal region. Recent NOAA press releases paint a distinct picture of the 1,640
Km2 of dead zone off the Louisiana coast (Fig. 2), where the largest hypoxic
region is immediately south and west of the outﬂow of the Mermentau River
basin ﬂowing west in a Gulf current.
In contrast, the positive impacts of rewilding in this region are potentially breath-
taking.Immediateimpactsonboththeglobalclimatecrisisandtheglobalbiodiversity
crisis will be felt and grow exponentially. Generating prairie soils rapidly sequesters
carbon and builds biodiversity deep into the soils, as prairie plants create a rhizo-
sphere that reaches as many as 4.6 m. in depth. According to Vidrine (2010), prairie
is the fastest and easiest of the ecosystems to reconstruct, if native plant ecotypes
are available. Farmers and ﬁshermen in Acadiana are facing a near-term economic
collapse that can be partially evaded if farmers and lawn-owners rewild parts of their
ﬁelds as an ‘investment’ in the local, long-term regional economy. In general, re-
invigorating soils, clearing rivers, changing hydrology, increasing biodiversity have
numerous positive impacts.
Rewilding the Cajun Prairie: Efforts in Land Rehabilitation Ensure …
95
Fig. 2 Hypoxic zones (dead zones) of the northern Gulf of Mexico (map prepared by NOAA, LSU
and LUMCON in 2021)
Enric Sala’s The Nature of Nature (2020) and Isabella Tree’s Wilding (2018)
compel readers with the impacts of rewilding ocean and farm habitats by providing
many examples of knock-on impacts of rewilding efforts. These authors concede
that even small efforts can affect a much larger neighboring region and potentially
have nearly global impacts, especially if migrating species use the rewilded habitat.
The point here is that a hectare of restored prairie can affect the surrounding several
hectares, provide a refuge for insects/life and connecting many isolated habitats into
ecological corridors that become effective in boosting biodiversity and restoring
services (Ricklefs and Releya 2014; Vidrine et al. 1995; Vidrine and Vidrine 2018).
National Parks were intended to protect the biodiversity of North America as
well as its natural beauty, in addition to providing an inroad for people to ﬁll some
innate desire to be in nature (Butcher 1985). These ideas were great, timely, and
accomplished many facets of their initial designs, but we (scientists included) under-
estimated the biodiversity of this country by an order(s) of magnitude, i.e., there
are tens to hundreds of times more species than we initially estimated, and they
are much more locally distributed than we imagined. Sadly, the bulk of the biodi-
versity remains imperiled. Doug Tallamy’s vision (2020)—a Homegrown National
Park—companioned with Ed Wilson’s concept (2016)—(half-Earth) are ambitious
and focus our immediate concerns—half of the planet has to become rewilded not
only for the conservation of biodiversity but also for the survival of humankind.
At the same time, biodiversity turns out to be much more complex than we
could imagine. Not only are there many more species than we thought, but they
also coevolved more intimately with their immediate neighboring species than we
have appreciated. With modern DNA sequencing and more detailed study of habi-
tats, restoration of wild places is gaining steam. Plant propagules and even animal
ecotypes used in restorations need to be in synchronism with local species, weather,
96
M. F. Vidrine et al.
soils, water, or any combination of these, via trophic rewilding. This is an ecolog-
ical restoration approach that focuses on restoring the functional roles of animals in
ecosystems, as these species can sequester huge amounts of atmospheric carbon,
pulling it out of the atmosphere into the soil thus, making wildlife populations
maintain healthy ecosystems (Schmitz et al. 2023).
Collateral impacts of restoration affect hydrology and soils—the two keystone
pillars of human survival and civilization. Both food and water security are impacted
by hydrology (water cycles) and soils (carbon cycles). Our Cajun Prairie had at least
a 1.0 m rhizosphere as a topsoil base above the clay pan at the onset of agriculture
about 150 years ago—it is now mere centimeters above the clay pan in some areas
and continually blowing away or running off into our bayous—once clear and sandy-
bottomed rich with ﬁsh and massive beds of freshwater mussels, literally cobbling
the bottoms of lakes, swamps and bayous (Vidrine 2010). Rainwater soaked into the
prairie soils and followed the 2.5–3.5 m. deep roots of our native plants recharging
the shallow aquifer system, which ran in the clay pan to the nearby ponds and
bayous and bubbled up in springs and seeps along these. The loss of this ‘run-on’
(percolation) hydrology has also resulted in ‘run-off’ hydrology, causing local ﬂoods
and sedimentation of lakes and bayous to an extent that mussel beds and ﬁsh resources
are imperiled.
We suggest that government agencies consider subsidizing and insuring farmers’
efforts at rewilding portions of their properties in order to improve crop production
that should appear with improved soils and hydrology. No-till and cover crops incor-
porated with rewilding appear to improve soils and crops (Tree 2019; Brown 2018).
The potential is obvious for our region (Fig. 3; Vidrine 2010).
After nearly 5 decades of inventorying species and monitoring the demise of their
habitats, it is time to begin measuring and celebrating the creation of new habitats and
the rehabilitation of degraded ones. Climate change (https://www.noaa.gov/educat
ion/resource-collections/data/climate) and biodiversity loss are changing faster and
faster in negative ways, but a positive revision is needed. It is time to closely monitor
and revel every positive change, while energizing any human endeavor directed at
restoring biodiversity and climate.
As a ﬁnal note, sea levels rise and local subsidence pose signiﬁcant, additional
risks to the Acadiana region. The U.S. Geological Service’s predictions are dire,
with much of the land area south of Interstate 10 becoming open water, marsh, or
deltaic—all conditions that are not suitable for agriculture. A predicted 12 cm. rise
in sea level per decade over the next 100 years is emblematic—these changes are
occurring faster than when initially predicted in 2008 (Fig. 4).
Restoring prairies as part of an emergency rewilding effort is necessary not only
to assist Acadiana with ecological and economic development, but also to reduce the
global impacts of climate change as predicted by meteorological models (LaHaye-
Fontenot 2023). Signiﬁcant reduction in the applications of pesticides and restoration
of historical hydrology by rewilding could create impacts that improve ecological
services (Vidrine 2010).
We are taking stock of the remaining patches of prairie and prairie habitats under
construction in Acadiana. As the hectares accrete, effects should become apparent,
Rewilding the Cajun Prairie: Efforts in Land Rehabilitation Ensure …
97
Fig. 3 Acadiana contains a variety of farms that are plowed annually for rice and soybean produc-
tion. Selected areas are used as pasture for livestock. More recently, many ﬁelds have been modiﬁed
for aquaculture of crayﬁsh. Aerial photo taken near Welsh, LA, in the center of the Cajun Prairie
ecosystem by M. Vidrine (1982)
although some of those effects may take years to be appreciated. An understanding of
the status of these habitats is urgently necessary to assess the potential for sustainable
development in the region.
2
Methodology
This study aimed at a strategy of collecting a combination of qualitative and quanti-
tative data. The qualitative data derived from a systematic literature review of recent
studies about rewilding theory and methods with a focus on reconstructing natural
habitats from agricultural lands. An analysis of selected case studies from south-
western Louisiana contributed to the collection of qualitative and quantitative data
(restored Ha.). Additional quantitative data derived from calculations of hectarage
whose conversion has happened already within a timeframe of almost forty years
(1986–2023) in this bioregion. Thus, the qualitative data from the literature review
and case study analysis (2 sets), were triangulated with the quantitative data to realize
the rewilding efforts accomplished in Acadiana.
This methodology has been effective in understanding challenges but also oppor-
tunities about restoring agrarian landscapes, despite the diversity of environmental
98
M. F. Vidrine et al.
Fig. 4 Ofﬁcial map prepared by USGS showing low-lying areas in red. These areas are subsiding
and susceptible to sea level rise. Many other maps are available that clearly show impending losses
due to the combined impacts of subsidence and sea level rise. Louisiana is proposing a 50-billion-
dollar Master Plan to avert some of these potential losses. It is evident that the Cajun Prairie
ecosystem is immediately north of this area, and bayous will be impacted upstream into the prairie
region
and ecological traits, that distinguish ecosystems and ecotones. Our study strived to
look for relationships between the two qualitative methods used for their data collec-
tion because in Popham’s experience (1993), these have the potential to enhance the
trustworthiness of assessment studies, especially when these are triangulated with the
quantitative data yielded by the case studies and estimate calculations of additional
lands undergoing rewilding in southwestern Louisiana.
3
Results
We present here a synopsis (in chronological order), of distinctive case studies from
southwestern Louisiana that demonstrate achievements in restoring the Cajun Prairie.
Rewilding the Cajun Prairie: Efforts in Land Rehabilitation Ensure …
99
3.1
Case Studies Analysis
1. TheCajunPrairieRestorationProjectinEunice—this,theoriginalprairierestora-
tion, was established in 1988 and created by the Cajun Prairie Habitat Preserva-
tion Society, LSU Eunice, and the community of Eunice (Fig. 5). Four hectares of
former railroad right-of-way were seeded and plugged with native Cajun Prairie
plant ecotypes (seeds and plugs). Prairies are in a good state of restoration with
a good mix of hillside and wetland prairie plant species.
2. The Duralde Prairie—this prairie restoration, established in 1994, created by the
Lacassine National Wildlife Refuge and currently managed by the Cajun Prairie
Habitat Preservation Society and the Refuge. Some 135 hectares were seeded
with seed from Oklahoma and Texas (non-ecotypes), but 12 hectares were over-
seeded and plugged with native Cajun Prairie plant ecotypes. Prairies are in a
good state of restoration with a good mix of hillside and wetland prairie plant
species however, large areas are monocultures of Little bluestem (Schizachyrium
scoparium) probably originating from the original seeding.
3. The Cajun Prairie Gardens—this prairie restoration, established in 1996 by Gail
andMalcolmVidrine,isafamilyresearchandlandscapingproject(Fig.6).Nearly
0.8 hectare was seeded and plugged with native Cajun Prairie plant ecotypes.
Fig. 5 The Cajun Prairie Restoration Project in Eunice, LA, serves as a refuge for ecotypes of
hundreds of plant species. The site is enhanced by a parking area and a concrete trail. Aerial view
by Marc Pastorek (taken in 2016)
100
M. F. Vidrine et al.
Prairies are in a good state of restoration with a good mix of hillside and wetland
prairie plant species, but primarily wetland species.
4. Fuselier farms—these prairie restorations, established in 2003 and since by
Vernon and Justin Fuselier, are currently used in a mob-grazing (rotational
grazing) cattle operation. Approximately 26 hectares were seeded with native
Cajun Prairie plant ecotypes. Prairies are in a good state of restoration with a
good mix of hillside and wetland prairie plant species, but primarily hillside
species.
5. Bruce and Gladys Guillory Family farm—these prairie restorations, established
in 2020 and since by the Guillory family, contain 162 hectares as part of a
wetland mitigation bank and additional acreages as part of a C-GRIP program
and personal prairie gardens. These were seeded and plugged with native Cajun
Prairie plant ecotypes. These prairies are too young to readily assess.
Early work on the ﬁrst and third of these projects has been outlined in several
books and articles (Vidrine 2010, 2018; Vidrine and Vidrine 2018; Vidrine et al.
1995, 2001a, b, 2003). Many new projects are too recently initiated to assess.
Fig. 6 The Cajun Prairie Gardens. Circles of predominant grasses containing smaller circles of
other grasses and forbs clearly evidence the high diversity and complex structure of this 26-year-
old project just outside Eunice, LA, USA. The large trees are Live oaks, while the prairie restoration
is cut by mowed trails into demonstration gardens in a rural, commercial lot. Aerial photo by Marc
Pastorek (taken in 2016)
Rewilding the Cajun Prairie: Efforts in Land Rehabilitation Ensure …
101
Prairie restoration provides the easiest opportunity to rewild Acadiana. These case
studies are tangible examples of rewilding efforts, both farmland and lawn, both
for grazing, wetland mitigation, research, and enjoyment/landscape beautiﬁcation.
Collectively, these sites provide refuge for native plant species and numerous wildlife
species. Extant, complex associations between native plants, insects, birds, ﬁsh, and
mussels, renegotiate food pyramids and energy cycles. The plants also provide seed
for further development of prairies in other locations of this unique bioregion.
3.2
Rewilding Farmland
PhilipLymbery(2022)providedaclarioncallforfarmerstounderstandthatindustrial
agriculture is the major driver of the climate change phenomenon and to act to restore
ecosystem health and most importantly, soil health. Conservation farming practices
effectively restore the fertility of the soils and reduce needs for non-renewable, fossil
fuel-based, synthetic fertilizers (Lal 2015; Borsari 2023; Gliessman et al. 2023).
Soil is a complex ecosystem, with unique local fungal/bacterial/animal genetics that
interact with native plants (Weil and Brady 2017; Borsari 2020). Rewilding lawns
and farmlands is the only way to secure native soils and extend future harvests,
despite the alarming narrative of industrial agriculture business groups urging an
intensiﬁcation of production to satisfy the needs of a growing human population
(Borsari and Kunnas 2020; Borsari 2021). With a goal of rewilding 50% of the
land/soil in Acadiana, farmers and landowners will need to commit to new farming
methods, where agriculture will have to be re-designed to ﬁt more harmoniously
within the ecosystems in which this is taking place.
Isabella Tree (2019) and Gabe Brown (2018) eloquently described that rewilding
and regenerative farming provide for healthier soil and may integrate into complex
farms with a mix of rewilding and regenerative farming in a sustainable system.
However, it is too early to be optimistic in thinking that the industrial model for
modern farming will evolve into one that sanctions their ideas because a fossil fuels
economy continues to support agribusiness (Borsari 2023). In Acadiana, farming is
failing both to maintain farmers’ livelihoods and to protect nearby biodiversity. While
we see beneﬁts to regenerative farming, inspired by agroecological principles and
practices (Altieri and Nicholls 2020), many ecologists see immediate beneﬁt from
rewilding across the board, where conserving local biodiversity is primary among
our concerns (Perino et al. 2019).
George Monbiot (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ny9qvGPx5ds) proposes
new ways to ‘farm’ and ensure food security, while, at the same time, rewilding and
conserving water, soil, habitats and the great remaining biodiversity of the planet.
His book, Regenesis (2022), provided a blueprint for rethinking global food secu-
rity. A recent article highlighted salient points about rewilding, which included: an
increasing recognition of the value of ecosystem restoration at a time of fast environ-
mental change; understanding the beneﬁts and beneﬁciaries in supporting ﬁnancially,
restoration projects; exploring the theoretical framework about the relevance of large
102
M. F. Vidrine et al.
plants and animal species for driving rewilding processes such as ecosystem total
biomass, resource ﬂows and fertility; and for showcasing successful initiatives on
how rewilding nature in the developing world is reversing the impact of invasive
species (Egoh et al. 2021).
The Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem
Services (IPBES https://www.ipbes.net/) has reported most accurately the loss of
biodiversity across space and time. This novel decline of living species is the conse-
quence of habitat loss, which justiﬁes the need for a restoration with emphasis on
rewilding landscapes. Preservation of existing habitats and restoration of agricul-
tural farmlands increase ‘wilderness’ as in areas where wildlife biodiversity can be
secured. We might survive climate change, however, we are unlikely to survive the
loss of biodiversity to the Sixth Great Extinction! While climate change and biodiver-
sity losses are linked, they are separate phenomena; ranking these as to importance is
clear for biologists, but it appears difﬁcult for public and private audiences to grasp.
Agriculture and aquaculture, as we know it, must change.
Obviously, changes in food resources and diets are immediately impacted. An
implementation of rewilding should expeditiously transition the human diet from
meat, milk, and dairy foods, toward a diverse microbial (Monbiot 2022), plant
(Musicus et al. 2022), and entomophagy-based diet (van Huis 2023).
3.3
The Signiﬁcance of Rewilding in Research, Education
and Extension
Ecologists argue that we humans have been operating as a massive geologic force
(Crutzen 2016) and a biodiversity strainer for millennia, facilitating an establish-
ment of only certain species, thus, modifying ecosystems to serve mainly human
needs (Young and Duchicela 2022). Tallamy (2020) added that people’s habits like
mowing the lawn, or even building nests, feeders and waterers in home backyards,
boost certain species populations, yet, in most cases thriving opportunities become
exclusive for some species, but not for others.
Moral arguments about biodiversity’s ecological worth remain important issues
that could become relevant for generating consensus among conservation practi-
tioners when an eco-centric education for sustainable development is employed since
the earliest age of future leaders (Borsari and Kunnas 2022). For example, Berry and
her colleagues (2018) discovered that among various stakeholder groups, there was
a broad diversity of views about biodiversity, suggesting that species valuation does
not justify always a destruction of nature; yet, differences among the groups, corre-
lated with their support for either an eco-centric, or an anthropocentric worldview.
Therefore, it is imperative to boost education in sustainability with an emphasis on
ecosystem conservation, rehabilitation and sustainable management, while engaging
Rewilding the Cajun Prairie: Efforts in Land Rehabilitation Ensure …
103
all segments of society in understanding the need to rewild landscapes. This aware-
ness can be achieved through outreach efforts similar to those provided by the exten-
sionpersonnelofthecollegeofagricultureintheU.S.forfarmers,gardeners,ranchers
and/or homeowners. Borsari and Vidrine (2023) envision curriculum modules and
hands-on activities that could become transformative for educating all learners in
sustainability. Shifting the emphasis of study programs (from pre-k to college-level),
towards ecocentrism appears to be the necessary reform in education, which is neces-
sary to develop a culture for stewardship and sustainability (Borsari and Mora 2020),
while reconnecting people with nature thus, restoring human wellbeing and planetary
health (Borsari and Vidrine 2022).
Our goal is to ultimately create a prairie reserve (10,000 hectares) through rewil-
ding of areas currently used for crops cultivation and rangeland. We hope that
homeowners join in this process and create prairie habitats in their yards, thus,
connecting habitat dots by corridors allowing us to live within the habitat matrix,
while keeping in mind ‘island biogeography’, understanding that every piece of
habitat is interconnected (MacArthur and Wilson 2001).
3.4
Quantitative Data: Hectares that Have Been Restored/
Rewilded
Since 1988, Cajun Prairie restoration has provided an opportunity to preserve plant
genetics (local ecotypes)—a resource for further restoration. Setting goals and moni-
toring progress in attaining goals is useful and informative. Attempts to develop
native plant gardens by the Louisiana Native Plant Society by setting goals and
monitoring progress and rewarding gardeners has proved to work well in Acadiana
(Marc Pastorek, pers. comm. 2023). The sites and hectarage of rewilding projects
are reported (Table 1).
Our best estimates include 1,349.3 hectares of prairie under construction. These
will create habitat for wildlife, affect hydrology, and beneﬁt human health. But at
this point, one of their most important functions is to serve as a ‘Noah’s Ark’ of local
Cajun Prairie plant and animal genetics (ecotypes) and provide the native populations
needed to properly recreate this habitat to maximize the number of species and
ecological roles/associations of species in the habitat.
4
Discussion
In the historical Cajun Prairie, most is destroyed (99.9%); the remaining 1,500
hectares (0.1%) persists in degraded states; 1,349.3 hectares are under construc-
tion. The goal for the community is currently set at 4,047 hectares (10,000 acres)
by 2030, 20,234 hectares (50,000 acres) by 2050, and 404,700 hectares (one million
104
M. F. Vidrine et al.
Table 1 Estimated areas of restored/rewilded prairie efforts (in Hectares) known to the authors
Year
Name
Hectares
Notes
1988
Cajun Prairie Restoration Project
4.0
Prairie restoration–ﬁrst
project
1989
LSU-E campus
0.4
Prairie restoration
1994
Duralde Prairie
135.2
Prairie restoration–Lacassine
NWR
1996
Cajun Prairie Gardens
0.8
Prairie
restoration–demonstration
gardens
1998
Mitigation Projects, Eunice
0.8
Prairie restoration
1995
Harmon Greenhouses
1.0
Prairie restoration
2015
Southfork
205.9
Prairie restoration–wetland
mitigation bank
2016
Moss lake
47.4
Prairie restoration–wetland
mitigation bank
2017
Willow lake
104.5
Prairie restoration–wetland
mitigation bank
2017
Black bayou
143.3
Prairie restoration–wetland
mitigation bank
2020
Black bayou addition
121.4
Prairie-wetland restoration
2017
English bayou
102.6
Prairie restoration–wetland
mitigation bank
2020
Bruce and Gladys Guillory Farm
161.8
Prairie restoration–wetland
mitigation bank
2023
Bruce and Gladys Guillory Farm
40.5
Prairie restoration–CGRIP
2000–20
Marc’s seeded private lands
242.8
Varied seeded projects/
restorations
1990s
Jim Foret Cade Farm
1.2
Prairie restoration
1990s
LouAna seed farm
2.8
Prairie restoration
2003
Vernon Fuselier Farms
26.3
Prairie restoration–mob
grazing
1995
Tommy Hillman
0.4
Prairie restoration
2018
Larry Allain prairie
0.8
Prairie restoration
2019
Acadiana Baptist Center
1.2
Prairie restoration
2022
Thomas Leblanc
0.4
Prairie restoration
2018
Robby Maxwell
0.4
Prairie restoration
2022
Oliver Garber
0.4
Prairie restoration
2022
Moncus Park
1.0
Prairie restoration
2000
Richard school
0.4
Prairie restoration
2016
Matt Conn properties
1.2
Prairie restoration
2020
Steve Nevitt’s other projects
4
Prairie restoration
Total Ha
1,349.3
Rewilding the Cajun Prairie: Efforts in Land Rehabilitation Ensure …
105
acres) by 2100. These are rough goals, and we are suggesting that they be accelerated,
just as the loss of biodiversity and climate change are accelerating.
Farming and ranching as they are currently performed are decidedly unsustain-
able and purport future economic and ecological devastation—evidence is already
accumulating that the living fabric of our nature is collapsing.
Unfortunately, landowners, farmers, and landowners who farm represent 3 distinct
groups, both economically and emotionally as to this enterprise. Most are waiting
for government subsidies/intervention, which by the way has come in the form of
subsidies for the development of solar farms, and/or commercial interventions from
large oil companies or other businesses (a practice commonly seen in the coastal
marshes, e. g., Rockefeller Refuge, where oil companies have subsidized numerous
efforts to rehabilitate and protect coastal habitats). Both of these will require time,
maybe years, and intervention is unlikely until agriculture is obviously failing; thus,
it is necessary for the landowners to work with other groups and invest their land
in rewilding. Rewilding apparently creates new opportunities both for wildlife and
employment for humans. The Acadiana community and the global community is
involved.
Sustainable Development Goal 15 (SDG-15) is one of the 17 Sustainable Devel-
opment Goals established by the United Nations in 2015. The ofﬁcial wording is:
“Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably
manage forests, combat desertiﬁcation, and halt and reverse land degradation and
halt biodiversity loss.” The Goal has 12 targets to be achieved by 2030 (Sustainable
Development Goal 15—Wikipedia). We focus on the following targets in our efforts
to restore Cajun Prairie:
Target 15.1: Conserve and restore terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems,
Target 15.3: End desertiﬁcation and restore degraded land,
Target 15.5: Protect biodiversity and natural habitats,
Target 15.6: Protect access to genetic resources and fair sharing of the beneﬁts,
Target 15.8: Prevent invasive alien species on land and in water ecosystems,
Target 15.9: Integrate ecosystem and biodiversity in governmental planning,
Target 15.a: Increase ﬁnancial resources to conserve and sustainably use ecosystem and
biodiversity.
Our efforts also touch on many of the Goals and could signiﬁcantly impact
outcomes (SDG 1. No poverty|Sustainable Development Goals|Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (fao.org)). Due to page constraints, these need
to be discussed elsewhere.
106
M. F. Vidrine et al.
5
Conclusion and Recommendations
Our study is supportive of rewilding Acadiana’s Cajun Prairie because this out-of-
the-box ecosystem management approach can ensure a sustainable future in south-
western Louisiana and into currently affected marshes, north of the Gulf of Mexico.
In addition to this, our effort has potential to become a model for rehabilitation of
the most ecologically devastated region in Louisiana. Our ﬁeld experience in this
bioregion indicates that readjusting this natural ecosystem in a relatively short time
fashion through rewilding, with prairie restoration is technically and economically
feasible. Because of the dominance of grasslands among terrestrial ecosystems and
their common fate in having been converted into farmland, we propose a theoretical
model, which could serve well rewilding purposes in more bioregions around the
world (Fig. 7).
Rewilding is a process, which requires ﬁrst an ecologically-educated society to
understand that we humans are components of a complex ecosphere and NOT in
control of it. This kind of education, or simply awareness, are necessary elements
to amplify values of stewardship and conservation thus, aiding in removing feel-
ings, or attitudes of indifference for living systems (Borsari and Mora 2020). Strate-
gies and techniques for rewilding are adaptable and thus may vary however, the
autochthonous germplasm of native organisms (especially plants), remains pivotal
to restore biodiversity (Perino et al. 2019), the health and resilience of rehabili-
tated ecosystems. Thus, the rewilding process described in our model yields restored
landscapes. These will spur a restoration of ecological services, species richness and
diversity a step further, making the system self-sustaining, or requiring only minimal
management. For these reasons an achievement of the rewilding objectives (and in
line with several targets to achieve SDG 15), will lead inevitably and over time,
Fig. 7 Holistic rewilding
model for rewilding
ecosystems
Rewilding the Cajun Prairie: Efforts in Land Rehabilitation Ensure …
107
to a new beginning of the rewilding process. The latter should require less human
intervention and adjustments, as time passes.
As environmental policies and actions of government agencies, corporations and
nongovernmentalorganizationscontinuetofailineffortstoreducetheilleffectsofthe
global climate change emergency, we think that, more robust research agendas about
rewilding landscapes should become more supported, worldwide. At the same time,
the joining voices from individuals, indigenous peoples and grassroots activists, may
expand further rewilding opportunities by challenging neoliberal market economies
(Dauvergne and Clapp 2023). In other words, an ecological recovery of landscapes
cannot occur in a vacuum because humanity is an integral component of these.
There is a need for reorganizing a political and social life that give the much-needed
emphasis to achieving the biological integrity of ecosystems and social justice,
concurrently.Thus,acommunityeffortbylandowners,farmersandthegeneralpublic
can make a difference. While one individual’s contribution is generally small, there
are large landowners that are making decisions to make large contributions (LaHaye-
Fontenot 2023). Collectively, both small and large efforts are needed to make signiﬁ-
cant changes leading to sustainability for the current lifestyle (Egoh et al. 2021). This
bottom-up, new environmentalism trend is what Dauvergne and Clapp (2023) called
‘biojustice’, or environmentalism from below and how this surging movement grows
in the coming years, will become decisive for present society to stem the escalating
global environmental crisis.
UsingmethodsresemblingthoseoftheAmericanPrairieproject(Freese2023),we
propose a Cajun Prairie project at the southern end of the massive prairie ecosystem
of the central United States. However, Freese (2023, p. 88) clearly acknowledges
the ‘relative ecological integrity’ of their region and recognizes the ‘heavy lifting of
habitat restoration that wildlife recovery requires’ in other regions. Acadiana is one
such region that has lost this ‘relative ecological integrity’ and requires a ‘heavy lift’.
The Acadiana community should recognize the perils of their decimated habitat, their
withering agriculture, their intense landscaping, and immediately seize the opportu-
nity to make signiﬁcant changes. The Cajun Prairie is their native habitat! This is the
easiest to restore to ecological integrity—both local scientists and prairie gardeners
have protected much of the unique genetics of the region in the last 50 years and half
a dozen techniques of restoration have received considerable study and implementa-
tion. Despite signiﬁcant anthropogenic impacts and environmental insults caused by
various economic activities in the bioregion under study, the native wildlife is largely
still present (Allain et al. 2000). On this positive note, we trust that the biological
community will be restored according to the timeframe presented here to its near-
original state, as Acadiana makes progress toward achieving the U.N. sustainability
goals for 2030, if and only if, our human community acts now!
108
M. F. Vidrine et al.
References
Allain L, Vidrine MF, Grafe V, Allen CM (2000) Paradise lost? the coastal prairie of Louisiana and
Texas. Documents—USFWS National Digital Library. https://digitalmedia.fws.gov/digital/col
lection/document/id/80
Altieri MA, Nicholls C (2020) Agroecology: challenges and opportunities for farming in the
anthropocene. Int J Ag Nat Res 47(3). https://doi.org/10.7764/ijanr.v47i3.2281
Berry PM et al (2018) Why conserve biodiversity? a multi-national exploration of stakeholders’
views on the arguments for biodiversity conservation. Biodivers Conserv 27:1741–1762. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10531-016-1173-z
Borsari B, Kunnas J (2020) Agriculture production and consumption. In: Leal Filho W, Azul AM,
Brandli L, Ӧzuyar PG, Wall T (eds) Responsible consumption and production: encyclopedia
of the UN sustainable development goals. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
95726-5_78
Borsari B, Mora C (2020) Education reform through a systems approach for sustainable devel-
opment. In: Leal Filho W, Azul A, Brandli L, Özuyar P, Wall T (eds) Quality education:
Encyclopedia of the UN sustainable development goals. Springer, Cham
Borsari B, Vidrine MF (2022) Planetary health begins on campus: enhancing students’ well-being
and health through prairie habitat restoration. In: Leal Filho W (eds) Handbook of human and
planetary health. climate change management. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
031-09879-6_14
Borsari B, Vidrine MF (2023) Envisioning prairies as curricular focus for climate change education.
In: Leal Filho W, Sima M, Lange Salvia A, Kovaleva M, Manolas E (eds) University initiatives
on climate change education and research. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-
25960-9_56-1
Borsari B (2020) Soil quality and regenerative, sustainable farming systems. In: Leal Filho W, Azul
AM, Brandli L, Özuyar PG, Wall T (eds) Zero hunger: encyclopedia of the UN sustainable
development Goals. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-95675-6_72
Borsari B (2021) Food production and Earth’s limits to growth in the Anthropocene [Book review].
J Ag Food Syst Comm Dev 11(1):211–213
Borsari B (2023) From agroecology to food systems sustainability: an evolutionary path shifting
toward sustainable agriculture and development. In: Leal Filho W, Azul AM, Doni F, Salvia AL
(eds) Handbook of sustainability science in the future. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-031-04560-8_8
Brown G (2018) Dirt to soil. In: One family’s journey into regenerative agriculture. Chelsea Green
Publishing, White River Junction, VT
Butcher HD (1985) Exploring our national parks and monuments. Harvard Common Press, Boston,
MA
Crutzen PJ (2016) Geology of mankind. In: Crutzen P, Brauch H, Crutzen PJ (eds) A pioneer on
atmospheric chemistry and climate change in the anthropocene. SpringerBriefs on pioneers in
science and practice, vol 50. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-27460-7_10
Dauvergne P, Clapp J (2023) Surging biojustice environmentalism from below: hope for ending the
earth system emergency? Glob Environ Polit. https://doi.org/10.1162/glep_a_00712
Dirzo R, Raven PH (2003) Global state of biodiversity and loss. Annu Rev Environ Resour 28:137–
167. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.energy.28.050302.105532
Egoh BN, Nyelele C, Holl KD, Bullock JM, Carver S, Sandom CJ (2021) Rewilding and restoring
nature in a changing world. PLoS ONE 16(7):e0254249. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0254249
Foley JA, Defries R, Asner GP, Barford C, Bonan G, Carpenter SR, Chapin FS, Coe MT, Daily GC,
Gibbs HK, Helkowski JH, Holloway T, Howard EA, Kucharik CJ, Monfreda C, Patz JA, Prentice
IC, Ramankutty N, Snyder PK (2005) Global consequences of land use. Science 309:570–574.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1111772
Rewilding the Cajun Prairie: Efforts in Land Rehabilitation Ensure …
109
Freese CH (2023) Back from the collapse: American Prairie and the restoration of Great Plains
wildlife. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, NE
Gliessman SR, Méndez EV, Izzo VM, Engles EW (2023) Agroecology. leading the transformation
to a just and sustainable food system, 4th edn. CRP Press, Boca Raton, FL; He S, Xu XJ (2015)
Three Decadal inputs of nitrogen and phosphorus from four major coastal rivers to the summer
hypoxic zone of the Northern Gulf of Mexico. Water Air Soil Pollut 226:1–18. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11270-015-2580-6
LaHaye-Fontenot J (2023) A Home Gardener’s Guide to Rewilding. The ﬁrst steps to trans-
forming your backyard garden into a native Louisiana oasis. Country Roads Magazine.
Available at: https://countryroadsmagazine.com/outdoors/gardening/a-home-gardener-s-guide-
to-rewilding-in-louisiana/
Lal R (2015) A system approach to conservation agriculture. J Soil Water Cons 70(4):82–88. https://
doi.org/10.2489/jswc.70.4.82A
Leonard BR (2017) Environmental pollution and nutrient management in Louisiana. Louisiana
Agriculture. https://www.lsuagcenter.com/proﬁles/lbenedict/articles/page1515001826284
Lymbery P (2022) Sixty harvests left: how to reach a nature-friendly future. Bloomsbury, London
MacArthur RH, Wilson EO (2001) The theory of island biogeography. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ
McLaughlinRE,VidrineMF(1987)PsorophoracolumbiaelarvaldensityinsouthwesternLouisiana
rice ﬁelds as a function of cattle density. J Am Mosq Control Assoc 3(4):623–625
Monbiot G (2022) Regenesis: feeding the world without devouring the planet. Penguin Books,
London, UK
Musicus A et al (2022) Health and environmental impacts of plant-rich dietary patterns: a US
prospective cohort study. Lancet Planet Health. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2542-5196(22)002
43-1
Osland MJ et al (2017) Assessing coastal wetland vulnerability to sea-level rise along the northern
Gulf of Mexico coast: gaps and opportunities for developing a coordinated regional sampling
network. PLoS ONE 12(9):e0183431. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0183431
Perino A et al (2019) Rewilding complex ecosystems. Science 364:eaav5570. https://doi.org/10.
1126/science.aav5570
Popham JW (1993) Educational evaluation, 3rd edn. Prentice Hall, Needham Heights, MA
Ricklefs R, Releya R (2014) Ecology. In: The economy of nature, 7th edn. W. M. Freeman and
Company, New York
Schmitz OJ, Sylvén M, Atwood TB et al (2023) Trophic rewilding can expand natural climate
solutions. Nat Clim Change 13:324–333. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-023-01631-6
Smith DD (2001) America’s lost landscape: the tallgrass prairie. In: Bernstein, NP, Ostrander LJ
(eds) Proceedings of 17th North American prairie conference, seeds for the FUTURE, ROOTS
OF THE PAST. North Iowa Area Community College, Mason City, Iowa, pp 15–20
Tallamy DD (2020) Nature’s best Hope: a new approach to conservation that starts in your yard.
Timber Press, Portland, OR
Tree I (2019) Rewilding: the return of nature to a British farm. Picador, London, UK
van Huis A (2023) Prospects for insects as human food. J Consum Protect Food Saf. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00003-023-01438-9
Vidrine MF, Vidrine, G (2018) The cajun prairie gardens. MF Vidrine, Eunice, LA, p 312
Vidrine MF, Allen CM, Fontenot WR (1995) A cajun prairie restoration journal: 1988–1995. Gail
Q. Vidrine Collectables, Eunice, LA
Vidrine MF, Allen CM, Borsari B, Allain L, Johnson SR (2001) The cajun prairie restoration project.
In: Bernstein NP, Ostrander LJ (eds) Proceedings of the 17th North American prairie conference:
seeds for the future; roots of the past. North Iowa Area Community College, Mason City, Iowa,
pp 151–154
Vidrine MF, Fontenot WR, Allen CM, Borsari B, Allain L (2001) Prairie cajuns and the cajun
prairie: a history. In: Bernstein NP, Ostrander LJ (eds) Proceedings of the 17th North American
110
M. F. Vidrine et al.
prairie conference: seeds for the future; roots of the past. North Iowa Area Community College,
Mason City, Iowa, pp 220–224
Vidrine MF, Quillman-Vidrine G, Vidrine DJ, Vidrine CE (2003) The cajun prairie gardens: demon-
strations of sustainable landscaping in southwestern Louisiana. In: Foré S (ed) Proceedings of
the eighteenth north american prairie conference: promoting prairie. Truman State University
Press, Kirksville, MO. Kirksville, pp 95–99
Vidrine MF (2010) The cajun prairie: a natural history. MF Vidrine, Eunice, LA
Vidrine MF (2018) The cajun prairie restoration project in Eunice, Louisiana: 30 Years of
Volunteerism. MF Vidrine, Eunice, LA
Weil RR, Brady N (2017) The nature and property of soils, 15th edn. Pearson Education, Boston,
MA
Wilson EO (2016) Half-earth: our planet’s ﬁght for life. Liveright, New York
Young KR, Duchicela S (2022) Biodiversity and the anthropocene. Reference Module in Life
Sciences, Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-822562-2.00035-9
Strategies for the Sustainability of Cane
Agroindustry and Development of Green
Agribusiness for Well-Being
Noé Aguilar-Rivera
Abstract Sugarcane is one of the main crops in the world as a source of food and
energy. It is located as agroindustry in more than 130 countries worldwide. The main
product obtained from its processing is sucrose, as granulated sugar of different qual-
ities, which has a story that began from the spices route as a luxury article until today
with marginal integration of agroindustry into the Agriculture 4.0 and Industry 4.0
with the production of bioethanol and energy by cogeneration. As a comprehensive
production process, all the stages of growing, management, harvesting, and trans-
portation of cane stalks with unit operations in sugar mills, trapiches (artisanal sugar
mills), distilleries, and bioreﬁneries, without sustainable practices, impact ecosys-
tems, the well-being of growers and human health; besides generate greenhouse
gases, consume high amounts of energy fossil and agrochemicals. Concerning the
byproducts (molasses, ﬁlter mud, vinases, ashes, bagasse, and trash), are minimally
processed or conﬁned in landﬁlls or the environment as waste. Although there are
a large number of technological proposals and sustainable development research
for their conversion to bioproducts, this agribusiness maintains, in most regions, the
cane-sugar mono-production which is highly unsustainable. The purpose of this work
was to analyze the challenges, constraints, public policy options, and the application
of transdisciplinary frameworks for incorporation in sugarcane agribusiness for the
sustainable production of raw material, valorization of byproducts, development of
new value chains, and generate well-being for stakeholders based on the objectives
of sustainable development.
Keywords Sustainable development · Sugar industry · Welfare · Agribusiness ·
Prospective
N. Aguilar-Rivera (B)
Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas y Agropecuarias, Universidad Veracruzana, Región
Orizaba-Córdoba, Calle Josefa Ortiz de Domínguez S/N Peñuela, Amatlán de los Reyes, 94945
Veracruz, CP, México
e-mail: naguilar@uv.mx
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_7
111
112
N. Aguilar-Rivera
1
Introduction
Sugarcane (Saccharum ofﬁcinarum) is a subtropical and tropical C4 plant that carries
outphotosynthesisandtheconversionofCO2 sunlightandwaterintosimple(sucrose,
glucose, fructose, etc.) and complex (holocellulose) carbohydrates more efﬁciently.
Cane for sucrose or energy cane is also considered a carbon sink comparable to
forests (Singels et al. 2021). The agricultural fruit of this plant is the stalk, in which
sucrose accumulates during the phenological cycle, and as a raw material, it is of
great importance to produce sugars and thick-walled ﬁbers of Liberian type used for
decades in the production of cellulose for paper and cardboard products. It is the
raw material of the traditional sugar industry as an economic activity of high social
impact due to its production, the employment it creates in the cane ﬁelds and because
sugar (sucrose) of numerous qualities, types, forms, and commercial presentations
is a fundamental product of high consumption, basic in the economy and the culture
and diet of many countries that has been impacted in recent years by numerous
complex factors that threaten its viability as an economic activity and for survival
of the population that depends on it. The sugarcane is sold mainly to sugar mills
considering only the quantity of stalks (tons) and not their quality (sucrose and ﬁber
in %) and the industrialists extract sucrose of low commercial quality and concerning
the by-products generated, only molasses is sold in regional or international markets.
As a result, this model is unsustainable.
However, sugarcane production and processing can signiﬁcantly help the achieve-
ment of the sustainability objectives of the 2030 Agenda (climate change, food secu-
rity, and eco-efﬁciency) and The Paris Agreement because most goals are related to
the crop ﬁelds and agroindustrial facilities. As a result, sugarcane is an important
crop that impacts environmental and socioeconomic sustainability, which generates
employment, income, and wellness (Yang et al. 2022). Concerning the foregoing, this
work proposes the sugarcane agroindustry must carry out the goal of analyzing the
current situation, challenges, constraints, public policy options, and the application
of transdisciplinary frameworks to transform the value chain and generate well-
being for all stakeholders within the objectives of the 2030 agenda for sustainable
development.
This review is structured highlighting key issues to explain (1) the expansion of
this crop through most of the tropical and subtropical regions of the world to produce
white gold as a spice in the sugar islands and with the centuries and technological
development, since the industrial revolution, as a staple food for the entire world
population. (2) The characteristics and advantages of the sugarcane plant for the
formation of a worldwide agroindustry (3) The technological, socioeconomic, and
environmental challenges of sucrose production, competition with other sweeteners,
and the use of harvesting and processing byproducts to create new value chains
called productive diversiﬁcation and (4) the incorporation of new frameworks such as
circular economy, life cycle analysis, agroecology, Agriculture 4.0, and Industry 4.0
to revalorize and convert this age-old agroindustry under the premise of sustainable
development.
Strategies for the Sustainability of Cane Agroindustry and Development …
113
2
Methodology
The research issues related to the sustainability of sugarcane agroindustry and
bioreﬁneries are numerous, complex, and highly interrelated. This proliferation of
knowledge is being generated among different disciplines (agronomy, engineering,
economics, environmental sciences, chemistry, biotechnology, and others), regions,
populations, ethnic groups, beliefs, worldviews, etc., in addition to the fact that
agribusinesses derived from sugarcane are constrained by regional public policies,
sugar geopolitics, technological developments, socioeconomic and environmental
impacts, changing consumer preferences and the business perspective of stake-
holders. For this reason, it is necessary to apply a trans-disciplinary approach with
the adoption of several methodological frameworks to develop solid conclusions for
the sustainability of any agribusiness derived from sugarcane.
Thisworkwascarriedoutinsugarcane-producingregionsofMexico,animportant
sugar-producing country, using a mixed approach. The quantitative stage was based
ontheconstructionofastate-of-the-artaccordingtotheProtocolandReportingresult
withSearch, Appraisal, Synthesis, andAnalysis framework, anddevelop (PSALSAR)
framework using the well-known scientiﬁc databases Scopus, science direct WoS,
and google scholar and keywords (Mengist et al. 2020). Besides the qualitative stage
was structured around open-ended interviews face-to-face or by e-mail to sugarcane
agroindustrystakeholders,mainlyacademicsandresearchers,consideringthecurrent
state, challenges, possible alternatives for management or technological solutions to
achieve changes in the medium term, and the prospective of a sustainable future for
the sugarcane agroindustry (Osborne and Grant-Smith 2021; Dahlin 2021).
3
Sugar, Nature, and Society
Sugarcane is one of the oldest commercially exploited plants in the world. It is one
of the main lucrative cash crops and source of energy in the form of disaccharides
(sucrose) widely available in different degrees of purity, commercial presentations,
and qualities, and economically accessible to the population of high marginalization
and poverty. Its botanical origin is in New Guinea, and from this place, according to
the numerous commercial routes, it was taken to the Asian and European continents
during centuries the process of obtaining sugar (from the Arabic “sukkar” and the
Hispanic Arabic as-súkkar) was improved and techniﬁed to obtain different types
and qualities with the invention of the trapiche (artisanal sugar factory) which is
currently used in several countries of America and Asia for the production of non-
centrifuged sugar that has numerous regional names such as panela, chanchaca,
piloncillo, jaggery, gur, etc. (Daniels and Daniels 1993).
Afterward, during the period of European exploration and conquest in America,
the search for gold and silver was the main driving force; however, the richness of
its natural resources promoted the transfer of sugar cane from the Canary Islands
114
N. Aguilar-Rivera
during Christopher Columbus’ second voyage, which was later planted in the lands
now occupied by the Dominican Republic.
Sugar was considered a highly sophisticated, luxurious, and inaccessible commer-
cial product mainly produced in the Mediterranean with artisanal technology as the
Trapiche (Galloway 1977). According to Higman (2000) the discovery of America
and the establishment of plantations in the Caribbean in the so-called Sugar Islands
and the colonies of New Spain, Colombia, Peru, Brazil, and others started the
world sugar cycle in which Spanish, French, English, Portuguese, and Netherlands
conquerors participated. Subsequently, the cultivation and processing of sugarcane
spread to numerous regions of the world. Besides, with the Industrial Revolution and
the use of sugar beet, the large-scale process extended its consumption by reducing its
sale price. In this way, sugarcane cultivation and the production of sucrose, rum, and
ethanol were commercial products that deﬁned regions, cultures, trade routes, and
nationalisms. Today, sugar cane or beet sucrose is the most widely used sweetener
in the world, and since the 16th century, it has been a highly valued and sought-after
product for adding sweetness to food products and for having a stable and growing
market niche (de Matos et al. 2020).
About 80% of global sugar cane production is converted into cane sugar, while
the rest is for the production of biofuel. Sucrose is composed of fructose and glucose
in an equal ratio. As a raw material is currently used in the food, pharmaceutical,
chemical, and biotechnology industries, among others. However, since the 1970s
sucrose has been in strong competition with high-intensity sweeteners obtained by
chemical and biotechnological routes such as high fructose corn syrup (HFCS) used
mainly in the manufacture of beverages and food, the intense scientiﬁc debate about
the potential dangers of excessive consumption towards the development of public
health problems such as obesity, diabetes, hypertension, mental disorders, etc. (de
Matos et al. 2020; Castro-Muñoz et al. 2022; Li et al. 2022; Crucho and Barros 2023).
Based on the conclusions of Ogura et al. (2022), it has been demonstrated that
the agricultural sugarcane management practices for sugar production have impacted
in an often irreversible way numerous environments and ecosystems, in addition to
generating contaminants in the soil, air, water, and impacting the health of growers
and populations with practices such as harvesting with burning, non-techniﬁed use of
agrochemicals and the low level of use of byproducts such as harvest residues (trash),
ﬁlter mud, ashes and vinasse, despite the existence in scientiﬁc databases of numerous
researchstudiesthatdemonstratethetechnical,economicandenvironmentalviability
of bioproducts derived from sugarcane and best management practices in crop ﬁelds
considered key challenges to achieve sustainability.
Notwithstanding, the cultural, technological, economic, low social capital forma-
tion and public policy failures are the factors that have conditioned the evolution of
the sugarcane agroindustry, considering only sucrose as a basic and strategic product,
necessary for national economies and popular consumption, making its survival and
non-competitive crop, unlike in other regions where it has been the major devel-
opment factor, as in the case of the establishment of agroecological practices and
sugarcane bioreﬁneries and Industry 4.0 (Zaiets et al. 2023).
Strategies for the Sustainability of Cane Agroindustry and Development …
115
Nevertheless, this millenary crop faces the challenge of evolving its marginal
value chain so that stakeholders (growers, entrepreneurs, and consumers) together
with decision-makers redirect actions for its sustainability due to complex factors that
although they cannot be generalized, some occur in most of the sugarcane producing
countries:
– Currently sugarcane stalks are the feedstock of sucrose production for the food
industry and in some cases for the combined production of sugars, biofuels
(ethanol and bioelectricity), and other bioproducts with biotechnologies.
– Heterogeneity, aging of the production plants in crop ﬁelds, few ﬁnancial and
technical capacities, as well as marketing capacities in certain markets where
public policies and stakeholder decisions have not been entirely effective.
– Breeding is a novel technology only employed at an increase in sucrose/ha.
– Bagasse is used inefﬁciently and trash is burned in crop ﬁelds in most of the
producing regions.
– Very few countries have focused on bioenergy prioritizing technological options
to increase yields in sugarcane and sugar production.
– Byproducts such as molasses are still sold as raw materials or exported without
any added value.
– Sugarcane production is still small-scale smallholder production of less than 3 ha
in developing countries such as Mexico.
– Degradation of sugarcane-cultivated soils is characterized by erosion, the impact
of harvesting with burning and extraction, volatilization, and leaching of nutrients.
– No fertilization according to crop and soil requirements due to numerous
economic, social, and cultural factors and low technology transfer.
– Quality (certiﬁed) seed is not produced due to the linkage with specialized sugar-
cane research centers that do not exist in several countries and the generation of
new varieties is a time-consuming and costly process.
– There is an efﬁcient composition of varieties and cycles (low plant level and
extensive ratoon).
– High incidence of pests, diseases, and weeds increased each cycle due to the
impact of climate change.
– Low sugarcane seedling renewal rates, high level of variety mixtures, and
depopulation of sugarcane ﬁelds.
– Extensive sugarcane production under rainfed conditions, highly impacted by
climate change.
– Unproductive system of traditional harvesting, without considering the soil
and climatic conditions of each region (a single fertilization formula generally
combined with ﬁlter mud and ashes or with vinasse irrigation).
– Sugarcane is cultivated in areas of higher vulnerability and risks due to the low
use of tools as agroecological zoning.
In general, there is great environmental deterioration due to unsustainable produc-
tion practices, which generates current and potential economic losses for the
sector.
116
N. Aguilar-Rivera
Besides,accordingtoRuthsetal.(2023),theruralworkingconditionsinsugarcane
crop ﬁelds are exposed to thermal, chemical, biological, physiological, mechanical,
and emotional risks and health problems such as respiratory, circulatory, renal, and
musculoskeletal diseases, genotoxic agents, and work-related accidents.
4
Sugarcane Cultivation, Processing, and Sustainability
Of all crops, sugarcane is the plant that converts solar energy into chemical energy
in complex biochemical processes during photosynthesis, in which water, oxygen,
carbohydrates, cellulose, sucrose, and other elements are generated (Takaragawa and
Matsuda 2023). However, only a percentage greater than 20% of the dry matter accu-
mulated during the vegetative period is attributed to commercial value; the remaining
is made up of the residues resulting from sugar production, such as leaves and straws,
bagasse, molasses, ﬁlter, vinasse, and ashes.
The expansion of sugarcane cultivation without sustainable management practices
and cleaner production in industrial facilities were the result of population growth, the
wide application of sucrose as a raw material in the food industry in the development
of new and attractive products for the growing labor force with less time for food
preparation, the wide adaptation of the crop to different regions due to the resilience
characteristics of the sugarcane plant to various environmental limiting factors and
constraints and regional public policies that focused on the cultivation and processing
of sugarcane as a factor of regional development (Singh et al. 2024; Cardoso et al.
2018, 2019).
For ﬁve centuries, sugarcane has been a major cash crop for social welfare in
tropical regions; however, throughout this period, sugarcane production has experi-
enced boom and bust periods due to various geopolitical events such as the oil price
crisis, world wars, the environmental crisis, consumerism and others of various kinds.
According to FAOSTAT (2023), sugarcane is currently grown in more than 130 trop-
ical countries, most of which are developing countries with high levels of poverty,
where sugarcane is perceived as a strategic survival crop that guarantees income,
some social beneﬁts such as access to health services, retirement, life insurance,
etc., since this crop is characterized by its wide adaptation to tropical climates. It is
characterized by its wide adaptation to soil diversity, climate, topography, fertility,
and agronomic management; high green matter production capacity (more than 100
t/ha per year) and dry matter per unit area due to its photosynthetic capacity and its
phenotypic characteristics, including its large leaf area, which helps it to efﬁciently
capture solar energy to transform it into biomass. This represents an opportunity for
the cane sector to continue supporting the global decarbonization effort and become
a welfare factor for the population as a sustainable agroindustry o bioreﬁnery.
The biggest producers of sugar from cane in the world are Brazil, India, China,
Thailand, Pakistan, Mexico, Colombia, Guatemala, and Australia. However, produc-
tion depends on various agroecological and crop management, institutional, and
political factors which are reﬂected in the productivity of the crop. In other words,
Strategies for the Sustainability of Cane Agroindustry and Development …
117
sugarcane is a potential high-yield crop but requires extensive husbandry, contin-
uous investment, and maintenance of capital assets to maximize yields. Brazil is the
world’s largest sugar consumer (123 kg per capita) and plays a critical role in the
global market as both a producer and consumer (Voora et al. 2023) besides producing
40% of the world’s sugar cane.
On the other hand, worldwide sugarcane is grown at all technological levels and
scales of production, from small family farms with limited resources and inputs to
large-scale plantation agriculture, mechanization, techniﬁed irrigation, intensive use
of agrochemicals and precision farming tools and Agriculture 4.0 to supply non-
centrifuged artisanal sugar mills, sugar mills, distilleries and bioreﬁneries (Sanches
et al. 2023) (Table 1 and Fig. 1).
Table 1 Technological levels in sugarcane production (Cardoso et al. 2019; Aguilar-Rivera et al.
2018)
Management
Characteristics
conventional
family-type
Manual technologies of planting,
fertilization, phytosanitary
management (pests, weeds, and
diseases), harvesting and picking
activities are with family members
without the use of machinery.
Generally, it is managed by small
growers (≈1 or 2 ha)
Highest job creation levels but low
productivity, rainfed cultivation,
low or no use of agrochemicals,
harvest is usually burned or green
and delivered to the trapiche or
mills, and the cane tops are sold
for livestock feed
Conventional
semi-mechanized
Planting, fertilization, and
phytosanitary management (pests,
weeds, and diseases) are carried out
with workers and family members
and the use of machinery (tractors
and implements). Harvesting is
manual and the cane is placed on the
trucks using loaders It is generally for
intermediate growers (≈3 to 5 ha)
Medium productivity, rainfed or
gravity-fed irrigation, use of
agrochemicals, harvesting is
usually by burning or green
harvesting and delivered entirely
to the mill or distilleries, and the
cane tops are sold for livestock
feed
Conventional
mechanized
Planting, fertilization, and
phytosanitary management (pests,
weeds, and diseases) are carried out
by workers and the use of machinery
(tractors, implements, and other
equipment). Harvesting is
mechanized. Generally, it is for
entrepreneurial growers (more than
5 ha)
High productivity, cultivation with
technological irrigation, use of
agrochemicals, harvesting is
usually with burning or green and
delivered entirely to the mill,
distilleries, or bioreﬁneries, and
cane tops and harvest residue are
sold for livestock feed or baled in
the ﬁeld
Agro-ecological or
organic
Planting, fertilization, and
phytosanitary management are family
activities, using green fertilizers, and
biofertilizers, and the use of
agrochemicals and machinery is
reduced. Harvesting is green and
manual
Medium productivity, cultivation
under rainfed or partial irrigation,
the tops are for livestock, trash as
mulch or rural fuel, and the stems
are intended for the production of
non-centrifuged sugar
118
N. Aguilar-Rivera
Fig. 1 Value chain of the conventional sugar industry
Since the Industrial Revolution and the consolidation of the capitalist system, the
conception of the nature-society relationship has been based on the consideration of
sugarcane as an external resource that can be exploited for economic purposes.
However, its main target product, sucrose, or table sugar, is a commodity of
great demand and instability derived from geopolitical, public health, environmental,
socioeconomic, and climate change events that directly affect commercialization
within regional preferential agreements and the world market.
These cyclical behaviors evidence periods of shortages followed by growing sugar
surpluses, which inﬂuence international prices that depend mainly on what happens
in the main sugar-producing, consuming, importing, and exporting countries (Fig. 2).
This approach is based on the premise of weak sustainability where technology
and manufactured capital can supply the ecosystem services of natural capital. This
contributes to the argument that reproducible capital is substitutable so that the
economy would not collapse when natural resources decline in productivity based on
resource economics, quantiﬁes the capital investment needed to balance the reduction
of non-renewable resources with the expansion of the harvested area. Such invest-
ment is made to ensure that the standard of living does not decline as society develops
into the indeﬁnite future.
One of the most controversial aspects of this model of sugarcane production is
harvesting. In conventional management, the crop ﬁeld is burned to cut cane by
hand; stem collection is carried out using forklifts and transportation to the industrial
facilities it is through old, highly polluting trucks. In the case of mechanized green
Strategies for the Sustainability of Cane Agroindustry and Development …
119
y = 0.2829x - 549.76
R² = 0.444
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
1960
1962
1964
1966
1968
1970
1972
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
2014
2016
2018
2020
2022
2024
c$/Libra
Fig. 2 Sugar prices 1960–2023. Data from USDA (2023)
harvesting, specialized machinery is used to cut and lift the cane, sending it to a
vehicle that accompanies it, collecting the cane in small pieces, which are then
transported to the sugar mill (Stem et al. 2024).
Green harvesting of sugarcane represents a viable and sustainable alternative to
the traditional harvesting method used in most sugarcane-producing countries and
can be carried out on land with the required topography (Solomon et al. 2019).
Concerning the unsustainable management practices derived from the controversy
in public health, the environmental impact of the so-called sugarcane agroindustry,
agricultural management practices, and industrial processing, the high generation
of byproducts with a reduced sustainable use, the failed public policies towards the
creation of competitive environments among many other factors of political, envi-
ronmental, technological and socioeconomic context, have led stakeholders, mainly
from academia and research, since the 1950s to seek options to increase the value of
sugarcane as a raw material and processing byproducts in the so-called diversiﬁcation
and reconversion of the sugar industry.
Ni et al. (2022) concluded initial research focused on the chemical and/or biotech-
nological modiﬁcation of sucrose as a molecule of high purity, low cost, and
high conversion capacity through sucrochemicals. This technological initiative was
widely disseminated due to the increasing international instability and price volatility
of sucrose, however, few sucrochemical technological developments were able to
compete with similar products obtained from other sources such as petroleum.
However, it has been demonstrated and driven by the effects of climate change and
the instability of the international price of fossil fuels that cane industries have enor-
mous potential to contribute to the sustainable transition to greener energy, either via
the generation of electricity by cogeneration or the production of biofuels (briquettes,
120
N. Aguilar-Rivera
pellets, ethanol, biogas, biohydrogen, and biomethane) to add value and reduce
emissions. Renewable energy production can be a successful diversiﬁcation option
when supported by public policy, the synergy between entrepreneurs, researchers,
and academics, and the creation of infrastructures to facilitate independent power
production.
Moreover, the search for increased efﬁciency in sugarcane production, extracted
sucrose, and productive diversiﬁcation with emphasis on green energy has led to the
use of different techniques, methodologies, and multi-, inter- and trans-disciplinary
tools, to maximize the use of resources, energy, increasing the quality of processes
and products, as well as reducing the impact on the environment and increasing
proﬁts (Grandis et al. 2023).
Notwithstanding, the current sugarcane agroindustry must face great challenges in
terms of productivity, productive diversiﬁcation, sustainability, competitiveness, and
welfare for the population. Conventional technological management options based
on agrochemicals, water, fossil fuels, and high energy consumption to obtain prod-
ucts of low competitiveness to enter the international market will not be successful,
especially those based on natural resources, and cheap and low-skilled labor.
In this respect, Guerra et al. (2020) commented that competitiveness for the sugar-
cane agroindustry should not only consider high productivity of goods (sugarcane
and sucrose), export capacity and diversiﬁcation of the supply of products from the
sugar mill, distillery, bioreﬁnery (industrialization of byproducts) or in the agricul-
tural ﬁeld with agroecological management practices, it also refers to aspects related
to environmental, social and economic sustainability criteria, its capacity to generate
increasing standards of sustainability, living and welfare of the population located in
the producing geographic regions.
Consequently, the competitiveness of the new sugarcane agribusinesses and bio-
reﬁneries will be achieved in addition to cost leadership/differentiation of products
obtained with state-of-the-art technology, speciﬁc and differentiated inputs, circular
economy and sustainable production of inputs, market knowledge, change of orien-
tation of the productive activity (diversiﬁcation and reconversion) and the technolog-
ical innovation process. This implies a transformation in the research model of the
research, development, innovation, and technology transfer (R + D + I + TT), from
the demand side and the impacts of the industry, ﬁeld, and markets on the quality of
life in the region, i.e., the sustainability of the new agribusinesses based on sugarcane
involves People, Planet and Proﬁtability (Aguilar-Rivera 2022).
The sustainable development approach will allow the concept of nature to be
replaced by the environment in sugarcane production, by proposing a new paradigm,
which is used worldwide, and on which indicators are built and progress can be
measured, as in the case of the BONSUCRO guide (https://bonsucro.com/produc
tion-standard/).
Nevertheless, in most sugarcane-producing countries, agroecological practices,
improvements in processing facilities and infrastructure, treatment and/or diversiﬁed
use of crop residues and processing byproducts, in general, are considered complex
and costly activities due to the low level of R + D + I + TT being carried out, and both
public institutions and private companies have not carried out this work effectively,
Strategies for the Sustainability of Cane Agroindustry and Development …
121
either due to lack of vision, legislation without prospective vision, political will,
diverse interests or lack of economic means. Consequently, it contributes to the
deterioration of the environment in large areas of the sugarcane-producing regions
(Lee et al. 2023).
Thereby, modern sugarcane agribusiness and bioreﬁneries refer to a combina-
tion of diverse technologies and disciplines, institutions, activities, and companies
that develop and deliver material inputs to the agricultural sector, produce primary
goods and, subsequently, have the technological capacity and human capital to
handle, process, transport, market and distribute food and other products such as
new raw materials, ﬁbers, livestock foods, biofuels, bioenergy, and others to various
consumers to generate the greatest sustainability (Reena et al. 2022).
Nonetheless, although diversiﬁcation and bioreﬁneries are fundamentally devel-
opment strategies of the traditional sugar sector; the diversiﬁcation projects in the
sugar and ethanol industry have not been completely successful, due in part to the
fact that technical and economic analyses for each case depend on the geographical
location of projects and predominant economic activities in the regions. In addition,
diversiﬁcation projects have been isolated or limited because they have been devel-
oped due to the economic need to increase income but mainly to reduce production
costs due to environmental impact payments by the waste disposal according to the
environmental laws of each country, such as burning bagasse on boilers to generate
steam and electricity, sell to pulp and paper factories, molasses as livestock feed
raw material, production of fermentation goods or export according to international
prices (Iwuozor et al. 2022; Karp et al. 2022).
As a consequence, the complexity of factors to be analyzed, mainly environ-
mental, social, economic, and political, in the project of a “multipurpose, multipro-
ductive and sustainable sugarcane agroindustry” has not been a reality in most of the
sugarcane-producing countries; and at the present time sugarcane growers are facing
the challenge of productivity reduction in spite of numerous advances in the areas
of agroecology, nutrition and plant protection, instability of the value of sugar, as
a unique product for commercialization in national and international markets. This
complexity requires prioritizing actions to evaluate alternatives for the industrializa-
tion of sugarcane and byproducts to create marketable, proﬁtable, and sustainable
productions, in addition to a change in traditional approaches, betting on innovation,
transformation and the creation of new production chains considering the quality of
the raw material, the composition of the byproducts and not the survival of the crop
and traditional agroindustries (Ungureanu et al. 2022).
Based on the existence of a robust research capital throughout the sugarcane
value chain, it is possible to raise the complex hypothesis: Is it possible to design
a strategy to promote, revalue, consolidate a regional identity and productive inte-
gration, reconvert, diversify, and/or transform the conventional sugarcane agroin-
dustry through the analysis of environmental management and the nature-society
relationship of economic, technological, social, political, cultural and environmental
elements involved in it to generate welfare?
Considering the above, incorporating productive diversiﬁcation in the conven-
tional sugar industry, as a strategy for the development and generation of well-being,
122
N. Aguilar-Rivera
Fig. 3 Constraints for diversiﬁcation projects
is a complex task since it depends on the analysis of numerous factors (Fig. 3).
However,itshouldbeacommonobjectivebetweenstakeholdersanddecision-makers
to generate high proﬁt and welfare for the participants in the value chain (Gonçalves
et al. 2021).
5
Challenges for Increasing Sustainability
in the Valorization of Sugarcane as a Raw Material
in the Circular Economy
Jaroenkietkajorn et al. (2024), Sequeira and Tortato (2023) and Katakojwala et al.
(2019) concluded that the valorization of byproducts to be converted into options
for sustainable development and the well-being of the population, it is necessary to
enhance competencies that allow stakeholders to make technical and administrative
decisions in the short and medium term to increase the productivity of sugarcane
ﬁelds, conventional agroindustry and develop bioreﬁneries within a framework of
sustainable development and circularity in the context of the world economy. This
approach must respond to the challenges of the current sugar industry:
– What is the sustainable future of the sugarcane industry?
– How much can we get from sugarcane and byproducts with novel technologies?
– What will be the competitiveness of the cane products against commercial
products?
– What characteristics should be incorporated in the cane ﬁelds of the future?
– How to move to sustainable sugarcane production?
– How to maximize the use of sugarcane biomass for alternative products?
– How many end products can we get from sugarcane?
Strategies for the Sustainability of Cane Agroindustry and Development …
123
– How to turn the new sugarcane agroindustry or sugarcane bioreﬁnery into a
welfare cluster?
The actions that enable the transition from conventional systems based on the green
revolution and industrialization with fossil-based inputs to sustainable sugarcane
agriculture and eco-industrialization are as follows:
– Territorial Management Approach and intensive use of precision agriculture
(Geographic Information Systems [GIS], Global Positioning System [GPS], and
Remote Sensing [RS]), to restructure the architecture of sugarcane crop ﬁelds to
optimize resources, develop the potential of current cultivars and minimizing the
use of high-cost environmental inputs such as water, energy, and agrochemicals
(Som-Ard et al. 2021).
– Agroecological management of current and future crops to develop the productive
potential of the sugarcane plant to its maximum biomass production potential
(Agroecological approach).
– Nutrition is based on the synergy of the state-of-the-art of chemical fertilizers,
liquid and solid organic manures, biofertilizers, and green manures (Nature-based
solutions).
– Development of new varieties considering extreme climatic conditions (biotic and
abiotic stress) to have enough new varieties to replace current old varieties.
– The use of technological tools such as in vitro cultivation to generate elite,
vigorous, and highly resilient sugarcane plants to improve growth and devel-
opment under unfavorable conditions activates defense mechanisms and favors
the use of other nutrients utilization.
– Techniﬁed irrigation systems using solar energy and water from high-tech
treatment plants.
– Agroecological practices such as intercropping with sugar cane, rotation, regen-
erative agriculture, and permaculture.
– Valorization of ecosystem services, generating new market chains integrating the
environmental dimension in public policies, and establishing clear mechanisms
for their implementation in the territory.
– Tools for modeling, prevention, and management of phytosanitary impacts, i.e., to
establish Epidemiological Surveillance platforms to determine the phytosanitary
status of sugarcane, through spatial and temporal surveys at the regional level, to
issue timely alerts and thus take appropriate measures to prevent infestations.
– Climatology will make it possible to carry out predictive models of climatic events
for the producing region, issuing monthly bulletins for decision-making, and thus
strengthen the epidemiological surveillance process in the behavior of sugarcane
pests and diseases.
– Increase mechanization and harvesting with commercial models with adequate
conditions for this purpose and develop equipment according to the topography
of each region, with advantages in terms of time and labor reduction.
– Signiﬁcantly reduce harvesting by burning because of lower greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions, improved soil structure, lower water requirements, and savings
in herbicide application in the initial growth stage of the crop. Besides green
124
N. Aguilar-Rivera
harvesting provides the transformation process with higher quality stems and
biology deterioration is extended, unlike the burned cane.
– Establish regional strategies for rural uses of trash (energy, pellets, briquettes,
biochar, substrate for edible mushrooms, and in sugarcane cultivation as mulch for
pest management and soil moisture retention and decomposition as biofertilizer.
– Use trash and byproducts from sugarcane processing and other agroindustries
in synergy in animal feed production, especially for ruminants, through various
technologies such as the production of ﬂours, silage, and supplementary blocks
to improve the quality and availability of nutrients, especially in times of drought.
– In the industrial facilities for processing sugarcane stalks, improve the oper-
ating capacity for production, use of resources, inputs, and lost time, etc. in
strategic planning that allows the achievement of optimal conditions that beneﬁt
the results of the sugarcane agroindustry and identify opportunities for continuous
improvement.
– Increase wastewater treatment plants from efﬂuents of cane processing for the
intelligent use of pollutants and treated water
– The
development
of
integrated
processes
of
sugar/ethanol/cogeneration/
bioproducts will allow a substantial reduction of production costs, inputs, energy,
and water, and increase of sugarcane competitiveness.
– Industry 4.0-based process integration is an indispensable condition to optimize
the comprehensive cane processing process, which is considered a development
objective not only for the minimization of productive costs or the maximization
of different ﬁnancial indicators but also for the improvement of environmental
performance indices, highly competitive market access, and the well-being of
stakeholders.
– Incorporate Quality Management System standards and best agricultural and
manufacturing management practices according to the International Organization
for Standardization (ISO).
– Permanentincreaseinyields,proﬁtability,andcompetitivenesswithtechniﬁcation
and management practices to establish productivity approaches: produce more
with the same equipment. Efﬁciency: produce more bioproducts with the same
raw material. Reduction of losses and emissions-contamination. Energy: produce
more with the same energy. Water: produce more with the same or lesser water.
Chemical products: produce more with fewer chemical products, less pollution.
Production of various bioproducts according to the market and the ﬂexibility
of processes. Recycling, reuse, recovery, the 10R of circular economy, and the
participation of sugarcane to the achievement of the objectives of the 2030 Agenda
of Sustainable Development.
– Reducesigniﬁcantlylosttimewithstrategicplanningtoolstominimizeproduction
costs and increase proﬁts.
– Certify in the Bonsucro production standard.
– Develop actions and strategies of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) for the
welfare of the population.
– Establish innovative public policies for cane agribusiness develop objectives and
goals of decarbonization, productive diversiﬁcation with bioproducts, and green
Strategies for the Sustainability of Cane Agroindustry and Development …
125
energy, and the growers and entrepreneurs share the proﬁtability of diversiﬁed
production, the payment for cane stems quality and trash where the deal includes
participation to growers of the sale of byproducts and bioproducts.
6
Ecotourism of Agribusiness of Sugarcane
For decades and until centuries the cultivation of cane has been a source of income
for many residents with a high level of poverty in regions that were characterized by
being pioneers in the agricultural development of sugarcane, speciﬁcally in the instal-
lation of the productive systems represented by cane plantation, sugar haciendas,
trapiche, sugar mill, and products, and byproducts. However, with the reduction of
income due to the low proﬁtability of the monoculture derived from the reduction
of soil capacity to support the cane plant to its maximum potential, climatic factors,
pollution by non-technical use of agrochemicals, etc. It is necessary to evaluate
regional alternatives to generate income and well-being for Growers and the popu-
lation. Therefore, the activation of an ecotourism route in the sugarcane landscape,
as an alternative for diversiﬁcation to the traditional cultivation and processing of
cane, would signiﬁcantly contribute to reducing part of the effects of the crisis in
cane regions and would help reduce emigration, poverty and improve the quality of
life of the population located in the areas where sugarcane is cultivated.
Furthermore, ecotourism, as an option of rural transformation, is one of the most
important vehicles for cultural exchange, its conservation should provide respon-
sible and well-managed opportunities to the members of the host community, as
well as provide visitors with the experimentation and immediate understanding of
culture, traditions, religions, beliefs, and environmental heritage of the region. Both
approaches are important to spatially displaying the socio-territorial impact of the
sugar agroindustrial complex in a region to understand the successive crises that
occurred, rescue their assets, and thus be able to raise some alternatives, including
tourism development linked to the sugarcane route (Fig. 4).
Fig. 4 Elements for the sugarcane ecotourism (Sugar hacienda and landscape sugarcane crop ﬁeld
in Córdoba Veracruz México)
126
N. Aguilar-Rivera
For instance, it is indispensable for a possible ecotourism route of the cane in a
region to carry out an inventory of tourist resources, services, and infrastructure such
as geographical situation, type of heritage (cultural and/or natural), accessibility,
characteristics, type and quality of available tourism services, current and potential
infrastructure such as sugar and derivatives museum, art, visit crop ﬁelds, artisanal
production of sugar, rum, spirits, etc. (Martín et al. 2021).
7
Conclusions
In this work, as part of the main objective, the challenges, constraints, public policy
options,andtheapplicationoftransdisciplinaryframeworkswereanalyzedtoachieve
a sustainable sugar cane value chain considering its enormous complexity in each
producing region thereby it is necessary to highlight some conclusions.
Sugar is a physical good (commodity), derived from sugarcane, a plant with high
climate resilience where its vegetative growth with various strategies and techniques
for crop management is carried out in a ﬁeld and an as monoculture and agribusiness
have a deep impact on social and political issues around the world. Sugar or sucrose
is the main ingredient of basic and processed products. Its price ﬂuctuates due to
the relationship between the abundance or shortage of production and its demand,
which is closely related to the production of cane stalks that depend on complex
factors difﬁcult to control, such as weather. The above results in uncertainty and
price volatility for consumers and producers.
The relevance of sugarcane as an agribusiness is partly due to very important
capital investments, as well as the direct dependence of millions of people, who
develop various inherent and complementary activities such as planting, cultivation,
harvest, transport, industrialization, marketing, through industrial facilities called
trapiche,sugarmill,distillery,andbioreﬁnerythatprocesssugarcaneandbyproducts.
Concerning the current characteristics of its consumption as a basic food, there
is a need to generate opportunities to diversify and develop new high-proﬁtability
agribusiness based on cane stems, crop ﬁelds, industrial facilities, and byproducts to
integrate a single vision of all stakeholders towards the same direction, a common
goal of achieving productivity, sustainability, and competitiveness.
This productive sector should be oriented toward the improvement of the value
chain since there is the production of raw material (cane stalks and trash), trans-
port, conversion, manufacturing, and generation of primary goods (sucrose, non-non-
centrifugated sugar, ethanol, electricity, and others), byproducts (bagasse, molasses,
vinasse, ﬁlter mud, combustion ashes, wastewater) that are still marginally used
despite being abundant, technologically suitable for high value-added bioproducts
and ﬁnally to meet regional development goals.
Throughout this novel value chain, stakeholders must optimize production factors,
supplies, goods produced, and conversion of byproducts according to the principles
of the circular economy and use tools and frames such as Life Cycle Assessment
(LCAS), Life Cycle Inventory (LCI) Life Cycle Impacts Assessment (LCIA), Life
Strategies for the Sustainability of Cane Agroindustry and Development …
127
Cycle Costing (LCC), Life Cycle Engineering (LCE), Social Life-Cycle Assessment
(S-LCA), ISO and Bonsucro Certiﬁcations, Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR),
Agriculture 4.0 and Industry 4.0 to fully develop the potential of sugarcane and as a
result of the foregoing, collateral agribusiness contribute signiﬁcantly to sustainable
development and well-being of the producing regions.
References
Aguilar-Rivera N (2022) Bioindicators for the sustainability of sugar agroindustry. Sugar Tech
24(3):651–661. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12355-021-01105-z
Aguilar-Rivera N, Algara-Siller M, Olvera-Vargas LA, Michel-Cuello C (2018) Land management
in Mexican sugarcane crop ﬁelds. Land Use Policy 78:763–780. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lan
dusepol.2018.07.034
Cardoso TF, Watanabe MD, Souza A, Chagas MF, Cavalett O, Morais ER, Bonomi A (2018)
Economic, environmental, and social impacts of different sugarcane production systems.
Biofuels, Bioprod Bioreﬁn 12(1):68–82. https://doi.org/10.1002/bbb.1829
Cardoso TF, Watanabe MDB, Souza A, Chagas MF, Cavalett O, Morais ER, Bonomi A (2019)
A regional approach to determine economic, environmental, and social impacts of different
sugarcane production systems in Brazil. Biomass Bioenerg 120:9–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biombioe.2018.10.018
Castro-Muñoz R, Correa-Delgado M, Córdova-Almeida R, Lara-Nava D, Chávez-Muñoz M,
Velásquez-Chávez VF, Ahmad MZ (2022) Natural sweeteners: sources, extraction and current
uses in foods and food industries. Food Chem 370:130991. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.
2021.13099
Crucho CI, Barros MT (2023) Sweet as sucrose. Nat Chem 15(1):154–154. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41557-022-01113-w
Dahlin E (2021) Email interviews: a guide to research design and implementation. Int J Qual
Methods 20:16094069211025452. https://doi.org/10.1177/16094069211025453
Daniels J, Daniels C (1993) Sugarcane in prehistory. Archaeol Oceania 28(1):1–7. https://doi.org/
10.1002/j.1834-4453.1993.tb00309.x
de Matos M, Santos F, Eichler P (2020) Sugarcane world scenario. In: Sugarcane bioreﬁnery,
technology and perspectives. Academic, pp 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-814236-
3.00001-9
Galloway JH (1977) The Mediterranean sugar industry. Geogr Rev 177–194. https://doi.org/10.
2307/214019
Gonçalves F, Perna R, Lopes E, Maciel R, Tovar L, Lopes M (2021) Strategies to improve the
environmental efﬁciency and the proﬁtability of sugarcane mills. Biomass Bioenerg 148:106052.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biombioe.2021.106052
Grandis A, Fortirer JS, Navarro BV, de Oliveira LP, Buckeridge MS (2023) Biotechnologies to
improve sugarcane productivity in a climate change scenario. BioEnergy Res 1–26. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12155-023-10649-9
Guerra SPS, Denadai MS, Saad ALM, Spadim ER, Da Costa MXR (2020) Sugarcane: bioreﬁnery,
technology,andperspectives.In:Sugarcanebioreﬁnery,technologyandperspectives.Academic,
pp. 49–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-814236-3.00003-2
Higman BW (2000) The sugar revolution. In: Economic history review, pp 213–236. http://www.
jstor.org/stable/2598696
Iwuozor KO, Emenike EC, Ighalo JO, Eshiemogie S, Omuku PE, Adeniyi AG (2022) Valorization
of sugar industry’s byproducts: a perspective. Sugar Tech 24(4):1052–1078. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s12355-022-01143-1
128
N. Aguilar-Rivera
Jaroenkietkajorn U, Gheewala SH, Mungkung R, Jakrawatana N, Silalertruksa T, Lecksiwilai N,
Nilsalab P (2024) Challenges and opportunities of bio-circular-green economy for agriculture.
In: Circular economy and sustainability, pp 1–22. https://doi.org/10.1007/s43615-024-00355-9
Karp SG, Schmitt CC, Moreira R, de Oliveira PR, de Mello AFM, Herrmann LW, Soccol CR
(2022) Sugarcane bioreﬁneries: status and perspectives in bioeconomy. BioEnergy Research
15(4):1842–1853. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12155-022-10406-4
Katakojwala R, Kumar AN, Chakraborty D, Mohan SV (2019) Valorization of sugarcane waste:
prospects of a bioreﬁnery. In: Industrial and municipal sludge. Butterworth-Heinemann, pp
47–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-815907-1.00003-9
Lee H, Sohn YJ, Jeon S, Yang H, Son J, Kim YJ, Park SJ (2023) Sugarcane wastes as microbial
feedstocks: a review of the bioreﬁnery framework from resource recovery to production of value-
added products. Bioresour Technol 128879. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2023.128879
Li X, Luan Y, Li Y, Ye S, Wang G, Cai X, Luan Y (2022) The effect of high-fructose corn syrup vs.
sucrose on anthropometric and metabolic parameters: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Front Nutri 9:1013310. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnut.2022.1013310
Martín S, Trujillo FJ, Bermudo C, Claver J, Sebastián MA, Sevilla L (2021) Sugar cane industrial
heritage in oriental coast of Málaga. A tourist route opportunity. In: IOP conference series:
materials science and engineering, vol 1193, No 1. IOP Publishing, p 012138. https://doi.org/
10.1088/1757-899X/1193/1/012138
Mengist W, Soromessa T, Legese G (2020) Method for conducting systematic literature review
and meta-analysis for environmental science research. MethodsX 7:100777. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.mex.2019.100777
Ni D, Chen Z, Tian Y, Xu W, Zhang W, Kim BG, Mu W (2022) Comprehensive utilization of sucrose
resources via chemical and biotechnological processes: a review. Biotechnol Adv 60:107990.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2022.107990
Ogura AP, da Silva AC, Castro GB, Espíndola ELG, da Silva AL (2022) An overview of the sugar-
cane expansion in the state of São Paulo (Brazil) over the last two decades and its environmental
impacts. Sustain Prod Consum 32:66–75. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2022.04.010
Osborne N, Grant-Smith D (2021) In-depth interviewing. In: Baum S (eds) Methods in urban
analysis: cities research series. Springer, Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-167
7-8_7
Reena R, Alphy MP, Reshmy R, Thomas D, Madhavan A, Chaturvedi P, Binod P (2022) Sustainable
valorization of sugarcane residues: Efﬁcient deconstruction strategies for fuels and chemicals
production. Bioresour Technol 127759. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2022.127759
Ruths JC, Shikida PFA, Fracarolli IFL (2023) Rural work in the sugarcane sector and its inﬂuences
on health: scoping review. Revista Brasileira de Medicina do Trabalho 21(1). https://doi.org/10.
47626/1679-4435-2023-779
Sanches GM, de Oliveira BR, Magalhães PSG, Otto R, Chagas MF, de Fátima CT, dos Santos
Luciano AC (2023) Towards greater sustainability of sugarcane production by precision agri-
culture to meet ethanol demands in south-central Brazil based on a life cycle assessment. Biosys
Eng 229:57–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2023.03.013
Sequeira DFQ, Tortato U (2023) The sugar-based industry operations within sustainability practices
context: a literature review. In: Sustainability in practice: addressing challenges and creating
opportunities in Latin America, pp 595–612. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-34436-7_35
Singels A, Jackson P, Inman-Bamber G (2021) Sugarcane. In: Crop physiology case histories for
major crops. Academic, pp 674–713. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-819194-1.00021-9
Singh P, Solomon S, Rastogi P, Kumar K, Rao GP (2024) Achieving sustainable development goals:
a case study of Dalmia Bharat Sugar and Industries Limited. Sugar Tech 1–12. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s12355-023-01343-3
Solomon S, Quirk RG, Shukla SK (2019) Green management for sustainable sugar industry. Sugar
Tech 21(2):183–185. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12355-019-00711-2
Strategies for the Sustainability of Cane Agroindustry and Development …
129
Som-Ard J, Atzberger C, Izquierdo-Verdiguier E, Vuolo F, Immitzer M (2021) Remote sensing
applications in sugarcane cultivation: a review. Remote Sens 13(20):4040. https://doi.org/10.
3390/rs13204040
Stem AD, Gibb M, Roncal-Jimenez CA, Johnson RJ, Brown JM (2024) Health burden of sugarcane
burning on agricultural workers and nearby communities. Inhalation Toxicol 1–16. https://doi.
org/10.1080/08958378.2024.2316875
Takaragawa H, Matsuda H (2023) Rapid evaluation of leaf photosynthesis using a closed-chamber
system in a C4 plant, sugarcane. Plant Prod Sci 26(2):174–186. https://doi.org/10.1080/134
3943X.2023.2210766
Ungureanu N, Vlăduț V, Biriș SȘ (2022) Sustainable valorization of waste and byproducts from
sugarcane processing. Sustainability 14(17):11089. https://doi.org/10.3390/su141711089
USDA (2023) Sugar and Sweeteners Yearbook Tables. https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/
sugar-and-sweeteners-yearbook-tables/sugar-and-sweeteners-yearbook-tables/#World,%20U.
S.,%20and%20Mexican%20Sugar%20and%20Corn%20Sweetener%20Prices
Voora V, Bermúdez S, Le H, Larrea C, Luna E (2023) Sugar cane prices and sustainability. https://
www.iisd.org/system/ﬁles/2023-09/2023-global-market-report-sugar-cane.pdf
Yang L, Zhou Y, Meng B, Li H, Zhan J, Xiong H, Zhang F (2022) Reconciling productivity,
proﬁtability and sustainability of small-holder sugarcane farms: A combined life cycle and data
envelopment analysis. Agric Syst 199:103392. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2022.103392
Zaiets N, Vlasenko L, Lutska N (2023) Neural network model for predicting technological losses
of a sugar factory. In: Szewczyk R, Zieliński C, Kaliczyńska M, Bučinskas V (eds) Automation
2023: key challenges in automation, robotics and measurement techniques. AUTOMATION
2023. Lecture notes in networks and systems, vol 630. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-031-25844-2_9
Greening Main Street USA: Adapting
Sustainability Indicators to Rural Areas
A’dayr Shewmaker, Anne E. Egelston, and Karl Aho
Abstract Given the recent rises in climate change, inﬂation rates, and social strife,
sustainable development is increasingly important. Accordingly, sustainability indi-
cators should be adapted for use across a variety of local levels, not just in the urban
counties containing metropolitan hotspots where they are currently most commonly
employed. As sustainable development indicators reﬂect the relationship of both
communal and individual sustainability and resiliency, this project will highlight
areas of concern that could further advance sustainable development in rural areas
in developed countries.
Keywords Sustainable indicators · Rural sustainable development · Resiliency ·
Ecoregions
1
Introduction
Within American society, the idea of “Main Street” with its tidy buildings, quaint
houses, and pristine tree-lined roadways remains a critical component of American
identity. Main Street designated communities celebrate their distinctive local culture,
public history, and economic development. Receiving the Main Street designation
or other similar recognition serves as a mark of distinction that could serve to bolster
community pride, increase real estate values, and encourage economic development
(Birch 2002; van Leuven 2022).
Main Street USA has come to symbolize both the populous urban areas that
have preserved some of their historic buildings and picturesque countryside as well
as the quaint small towns that eagerly await tourists coming to get away from it
all. Yet the lived experience of many residents of rural America may conﬂict with
the idyllic picture the Main Street designation implies. With the mass migration of
people entering the American city, rural areas have suffered a signiﬁcant decline.
A. Shewmaker · A. E. Egelston (B) · K. Aho
Tarleton State University, Stephenville, TX, USA
e-mail: egelston@tarleton.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_8
131
132
A. Shewmaker et al.
Today roughly 20% of Americans live in rural communities (United States Census
Bureau 2017).
The decline in rural resources combined with the lack of government support
has made rural communities vulnerable to further population decline and economic
instability. Rural communities are less likely to adopt sustainability than their urban
counterparts due to a lack of ﬁnancial ability and institutional capacities (Haider
et al. 2017). These communities are further hampered because they do not receive
the same level of developmental resources from government funding (Ajilore and
Willingham 2019). Additionally, the absence of many facets of an urban society
may also impact the resiliency of communities, a concept that should be closely
intertwined with sustainability.
Rural American communities may be vulnerable to a wider variety of negative
externalities than people relocating from rural communities to urban areas. Like
many urban areas, global environmental problems such as climate change, ozone
depletion, and biodiversity loss also impact rural populations. Additionally, local and
regional environmental degradation such as a reduction in the water table impacts
people, especially that portion of the population that choose to live more remotely
on property far removed from a population center.
This facet of the American experience may emphasize people as part of the land as
explainedbyLeopold(1949).Throughthispioneeringwork,Leopoldpointedoutthat
those who loved the land were more likely to act to preserve it. Thus, for Leopold, one
focalpointofpeople’srelationshipwithnaturefocusedontheirintroductiontonature,
primarily through characteristically rural activities like hunting, ﬁshing, farming, and
ranching. Nature tourism also constitutes an entry point into a relationship with land.
Signiﬁcant regional differences exist within the United States that contribute
to nature tourism. The American insistence on creating the National Park Service
embedded nature tourism as part of the American experience. Much like the Main
Street Program, hosting national parks, or their state counterparts, also increases the
prestige of a community as interest in understanding differences between the regions
grows.
As part of their national responsibilities in protecting the environment, the Envi-
ronmental Protection Agency (EPA) publishes research about the status of the coun-
tryside, including information about the various regions. EPA currently utilizes a
tiered approach to describing ecoregions within North America, including the conti-
nental United States. Level 1 ecoregions focus on the highest levels of commonalities
to discern large-scale patterns. Level 2 and Level 3 ecoregions each improve clarity
by focusing on successfully smaller differences. With 84 so-called Level 3 ecore-
gions recognized by EPA (2013) for the continental United States, the American
landscape contains great diversity that merits consideration. While rural lifestyles
may share similarities, generic or vague indicators may not be able to capture the
distinctive nature of the relationships with the land given the amount of variation
within the country.
The sheer variety of ecoregions within the United States could constitute a signif-
icant barrier to a full understanding of the relationships necessary to implement
sustainability in a rural setting. Rural communities and ecoregions have rarely been
Greening Main Street USA: Adapting Sustainability Indicators to Rural …
133
a priority for academic researchers as urban areas receive signiﬁcantly more scrutiny
(Opp and Saunders 2013). This, however, may be changing as recent innovations in
big data allow for larger scales of study. For example, the recently published Climate
Vulnerability Index uses data at the Census block level to predict the areas that may
be most vulnerable to climate change in the future (Lewis et al. 2023).
Adding rural areas of study to the existing literature increases our ability to
successfully implement sustainable development. This project establishes a ratio-
nale for creating sustainability indicators for rural communities that encompass
ecoregions in addition to political boundaries, as a necessary condition to under-
standing the relationship between people and the environment along with increasing
our understanding of the overall health and well-being of rural America.
The chapter continues in the next section by reviewing critical elements within
the scope of the project, namely rural communities, ecoregions, sustainability, and
resiliency. The chapter continues by highlighting current scholarship that may be
used to derive theoretical insights about these elements to create a new theoretical
model for future testing. This section also includes the development of hypotheses
that could be tested in future research. This chapter concludes by reviewing the
potential limitations of the model and hypotheses.
1.1
Deﬁning Ecoregions, Sustainability, and Resiliency
As this work closely examines the intersection of ecoregions, sustainability, and
resiliency, deﬁning these terms and describing the basis of their interactions may
be prudent. Sustainable communities affect the social, economic, and environmental
well-being of the persons, ﬂora, and fauna that comprise them. These communities
or ecological regions, also called ecoregions, are areas exhibiting similarities in the
ecosystem (Omernik and Bailey 1997) that fuse together ecological and geograph-
ical conceptualizations to create a socio-ecological system (Loveland and Merchant
2004). Ecoregions are important to the sustainability discussion because sustain-
ability occurs within, and depends upon, an ecoregion. Human well-being cannot be
separated from the well-being of the land, in its broadest sense. By emphasizing the
role that ecoregions play in determining environmental quality, it may be possible to
ensure a more sustainable and resilient society (Walker et al. 2004).
Ecoregions contain both biological diversity and social diversity. These two facets
interact along at least two dimensions. First, the contours of the ecoregion may dictate
human behavior as people base their lifestyle on their geography, including natural
resource availability and climate. Natural resource availability not only impacts
whether humans can comfortably dwell in the area, but it also contributes to the
economy through natural resource extraction. Second, social processes may have
the ability to transform the ecoregion as socio-ecological drivers interact to form
complex relationships at a systems level (Londe et al. 2022).
Sustainability, introduced in the late 1970s, seeks to alter the dominant global
economic paradigm and its growth imperative by incorporating human dimensions
134
A. Shewmaker et al.
and environmental resource limitations directly into the global economy. While
the earliest uses of sustainability occurred most directly in relationship to natural
resource conservation, the World Commission on Environment and Development
broadened its conceptualization (Egelston 2013, 2022; Mebratu 1998). Thus, sustain-
able development acquired its now familiar deﬁnition of “a development that meets
the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to
meet their own needs” (World Commission on Environment and Development 1987).
Sustainable development contains three policy dimensions or “pillars” responsible
for equally carrying the weight of achieving sustainable development: environment,
economy, and society. The three pillars of sustainability reinforce each other to
provide equilibrium between these three elements.
Since Our Common Future’s release in 1987, sustainability has remained an
elusive concept, in that it consistently means different things to different groups
(White 2013). While states agreed to discuss sustainability at the Earth Summit in
1992, adopting Agenda 21 proved to be contentious and difﬁcult (Egelston 2013,
2022). Within Agenda 21, states emphasized eliminating poverty as a major goal
along with managing individual consumption, shifting energy production from fossil
fuels to renewable resources, and limiting natural resource extraction. States also
highlighted the need for ensuring clean water, sewage, and solid waste treatment for
all global residents. However, the United States vociferously objected to provisions
that requested limiting future consumption and swiftly ignored the document, turning
into a “laggard” in the words of Lafferty and Meadowcroft (2000).
Selman (1998) called the emergence of Local Agenda 21 as one of the “unexpected
outcomes” of the Earth Summit that spurred action in many cities. As a result, urban
areas mobilized to support sustainability. This response added a layer of governance
to the sustainability discourse and cities gained political saliency that coexists, albeit
unequally, with national policies. It is unsurprising, then, that cities quickly emerged
as a focal area for sustainability as these governments looked to limit their negative
impact on the environment and provide positive examples of implementing projects
in support of sustainable development.
Efforts within the formal diplomatic systems to further implement sustainability
culminated in the 2000 Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) that galvanized
action through a framework of accountability for national governments from 2000
to 2015 (Fukuda-Parr 2004). While developing countries, the target audience for
the MDGs, widely failed to meet many of these goals, the creation process behind
the MDGs proved beneﬁcial and garnered global attention. States’ interest grew
over this ﬁfteen-year period, culminating with the World Summit on Sustainable
Development, held in New York City, September 25–27th 2015. States authored
Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development which
continued to support the three pillars of sustainability (UN General Assembly 2015).
The SDGs emphasized goals and targets that apply to sustainable development.
Organizations at all levels of society may develop indicators, as they are an indis-
pensable tool to properly analyze and measure sustainable development (Lehtonen
et al. 2016). The pursuit of sustainability measurement has occurred on two different
Greening Main Street USA: Adapting Sustainability Indicators to Rural …
135
tracks, one led by states through the United Nations, and another by the so-called non-
state actors, many of which have focused on cities, away from formal arenas of inter-
national diplomacy. Thus, the debate over the creation and selection of sustainability
indicators evolved through self-selection for organizations, research initiatives, and
UN-led initiatives.
Many research projects developing indicators for rural context do so in the context
of speciﬁc development projects. Some sustainability studies focused on rural areas
emphasized the need for development that enables data collection, extending that
concept from smart cities to smart rural villages (Maja et al. 2020). Other studies
used speciﬁc goals, like a “safe, healthy, convenient and comfortable rural living
environment,” to guide their selection of indicators (Li et al. 2021). A third sort of
study used a restricted set of indicators, e.g. focusing on socio-economic indicators
rather than social indicators as such (Zhao et al. 2021). Each of these approaches
adds to sustainability research and can guide sustainable policymaking. However,
the fact that rural areas are studied less frequently mean that many such areas lack
the insights that might be gleaned from such studies, or are limited by not having a
more complete set of indicators.
Urban areas beneﬁtted from multiple research projects that created indicators.
Projects range in scale from those involving single cities (Holden 2006), multiple
cities (Opp and Saunders 2013; Steiniger et al. 2020), or cities and their surrounding
areas (Mascarenhas et al. 2010). Methodologies for these various categories vary as
Opp and Saunders (2013) created a methodology speciﬁcally for ranking cities while
Steiniger et al. (2020) designed a methodology to allow a comparison yet avoid a
ranking.
The focus on cities within sustainability also led to concerns about resilience as
SDG 11’s mission is to “make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient
and sustainable” (United Nations General Assembly 2015). This phrasing, along with
the linkage between climate change adaptation and resiliency, led to discussion and
debate of the nature of the relationship between sustainability and resiliency. Like
sustainability, resiliency is an elusive concept. Holling (1973) described resilience
as the magnitude of disruption that could occur before the system reorganized.
While sustainability focuses on how to responsibly manage resources to not
disrupt the needs of future generations, resiliency focuses on the response of a system,
to consistent stress and drastic shocks including natural disasters and climate changes
as well as human-induced catastrophes (Marchese et al. 2018). Resiliency has also
been conceptualized as identical or exceptionally similar to sustainability (Adger
2003, Edwards 2009; Farrell and Twinning-Ward 2005; Marchese et al. 2018), as
persistence (Fiksel et al. 2014), as recovery from a shock (Walker 2020; Walker et al.
2002; Walker et al. 2004; Walker and Salt 2006), and as an adaptative capacity with a
particular emphasis on linkages to climate change adaptation (Redman 2014). With
these deﬁnitions in place, the next section begins to develop a theoretical model that
relates sustainability indicators to resiliency.
136
A. Shewmaker et al.
2
Literature Review
While state governments may have a vested interest in assuring that resiliency
occurs within their boundaries, other actors have signiﬁcant input in measuring this
social phenomenon (Roostaie et al. 2019). The shared concern from both political
and academic entities in sustainability indicators through both formal negotiating
processes and informal systems suggests that implementing sustainability fall under
the heading of global governance with its reliance on non-state actors, academic
resources, and weak institutional arrangements (Biermann et al. 2017; Kanie and
Biermann 2017). Governance, particularly global governance, may be used to indi-
cate instances where political goals such as sustainability and resiliency may be
deemed worthwhile by states, but that the political power of the state may be notably
absent in dictating measures to meet these goals (Eskelinen 2021).
Managing global society to achieve sustainable development requires self-
directing tools given the decentralization of state power (Biermann et al. 2017).
Utilizing frameworks with indicators thus serves as one means to coordinate these
independent movements as the existence of these frameworks has the potential to
improve the communication of sustainable development to internal and external audi-
ences (Kanie and Biermann 2017; Lehtonen et al. 2016; Lyytimäki et al. 2013). Thus,
the incorporation of additional levels of government could be seen as a necessary
expansion to complete the shift to a sustainable development paradigm that also
emphasizes resiliency.
A rapid proliferation of indicator frameworks has emerged and continues to
expand. Lehtonen et al. (2016) noted that no universal framework for sustainability
currently exists that applies to all circumstances in all locales. Consequently, sustain-
ability frameworks exist at multiple levels of government including the local, the
regional, the national, and the supranational (c.f. Lehtonen et al. 2016; Michalina
et al. 2021; Moreno Pires et al. 2014).
Indicator selection remains a difﬁcult and contested process within sustainability
frameworks. Not only does the selection process reﬂect the application of political
power structures and inﬂuence over outcomes, but the process also reﬂects norma-
tive elements of what constitutes well-being for both individuals and communi-
ties (Rametsteiner et al. 2011). These political and normative processes also impact
studies of sustainability and resiliency.
Moreno Pires et al. (2014) noted that common indicators for sustainability frame-
works may not be viable as solutions vary according to cultural, political, and insti-
tutional contexts. Ecological diversity also impacts sustainability solutions. Sustain-
ability in the Mojave Desert, by necessity, will appear signiﬁcantly different from
sustainability on the American Gulf Coast.
For the researcher, creating an indicator framework also could introduce bias
due to these inherent relationships. Academic scholarship separates the indicator
selection process into a “bottom-up” approach that requires the formation of a group
consisting of local experts who select the indicators for their area (Lützkendorf
and Balouktsi 2017) Conversely, other scholars advocate the “top-down” approach
Greening Main Street USA: Adapting Sustainability Indicators to Rural …
137
where the researcher selects the indicators based on their expert knowledge (Hajer
et al. 2015). Atanada (2018) introduced a methodology that combined these two
approaches. In the case, where a single researcher seeks to perform these steps,
heightened potential for bias occurs.
Sustainability frameworks tend to be created by similar processes that include
selecting or creating indicators, selecting variables, applying the indicator to the
target, and evaluating the information provided (Steiniger et al. 2020). With the
proliferation of case studies, the indicator search process itself becomes increasingly
difﬁcult. As each study adds to the academic literature, the amount of knowledge,
time, and effort necessary to complete a study disproportionately increases. No easy
solution to the laborious process of sorting through indicators exists in part because
some indicators may be able to transcend boundaries, while other indicators will not.
That is not tosaythat commonalities betweensustainabilityindicators donot exist,
regardless of the process of their creation. For example, there should not be much
variability in an indicator seeking to measure unemployment to determine the amount
of poverty within a country, regardless of the level of analysis of the sustainability
framework. However, ecosystems while universal, are also uniquely constituted, and
some portion of the sustainability indicators may need to be highly localized. For
example, there is a difference between an indicator that seeks to measure biodiversity
(a commonly included indicator) as opposed to an indicator that seeks to measure the
health and well-being of a so-called keystone species as an indicator of ecosystem
health (Dale et al. 2018).
Miola and Schlitz (2019) conﬁrm that there is a tradeoff between the need
for generic indicators that allow comparability and the desire to have detailed
data for local decision-making processes. While it is understandable that certain
commonalities between areas would allow for some standardization, the diversity of
sustainability solutions remains an important, if elusive, concept.
Past attempts to reconcile sustainability and resiliency into an integrative frame-
work focused on resiliency in light of a socio-economic system. Marchese et al.
(2018) suggested three possible relationships between sustainability and resiliency.
First, resiliency serves as a subset of sustainability. Second, sustainability serves
as a subset of resiliency. Third, sustainability and resiliency serve as two indepen-
dent constructs. Lew et al. (2016) supported the third framework and distinguished
sustainability and resiliency as differing discourses that approach similar questions
and policy choices with differing outlooks, normative frameworks, and assumptions
that ultimately result in different outcomes.
The relationship between resiliency and sustainability then can be categorized
into a positive relationship, a negative relationship, or an uncorrelated relationship
(Marchese et al. 2018). Recognizing that much of the research to date occurred at the
system level, we propose instead using indicators to investigate the sub-system levels
to ask the question of why resiliency and sustainability may be positively, negatively,
or not correlated. Folke et al. (2010) also recognize the need to examine resiliency
at a sub-system level. They distinguish resiliency at the system level (generalized
resiliency) versus resiliency at the sub-system level (specialized resiliency). There
is, however, no linkage provided between sustainability and specialized resiliency.
138
A. Shewmaker et al.
Introducing the sub-system level allows for consideration of resiliency from
differing points within the system. For example, some scholars consider resiliency
from the perspective of an individual psychological standpoint as a positive adap-
tive response to adversity (Chaskin 2008; Luther et al. 2000). Other scholars view
resiliency as promoting recovery from traumatic life events (Masten et al. 1990), such
as rebuilding communities after a hurricane. Finally, there is the idea that resiliency
is a result of everyday human activities, or “ordinary magic,” rather than extraor-
dinary interventions (Masten 2001). These speciﬁc social perspectives contribute
to our understanding of the relationship between resilience and sustainability by
illuminating phenomena that a system-level approach would not.
Consider, for example, a teacher who brings food to their classroom because
they know their students are food-insecure. The teacher’s action is not extraordinary.
They observed student hunger and found a solution that reduced hunger, thereby
improving education outcomes psychologically (because students have the energy
to learn) and socially (because of the beneﬁcial effects of eating together). A system-
level analysis would not recognize this teacher as contributing to the community’s
resilience because this method relies on outcomes rather than observation. Nor would
such an approach recognize community institutions like food pantries or groups
offering free meals to hungry college students. These sorts of hidden interventions
may be especially important in rural communities, particularly those without the
economies of scale that (Haider et al. 2017) describe. Such communities may lack
mechanisms for data collection and analysis. Attending to the social sub-system thus
provides insights into resilience that a system-level analysis would not. Moreover,
these insights may prove especially salient for maintaining Main Street, particularly
in rural contexts.
Shifting perspectives to the sub-system level may also allow a closer analysis
of the sustainability and resiliency relationship and the indicators used to measure
them in the context of particular communities. Returning to the deﬁnitions of both
resiliency and sustainability, four possible types of relationships emerge. The ﬁrst is
that indicators may be both sustainable and resilient. The second is that indicators
may be sustainable, but not resilient. The third is that indicators may be resilient, but
not sustainable. The fourth is that indicators may be neither sustainable nor resilient.
Understanding the four types of relationship between sustainability and resiliency
may help illustrate where the negative trade-offs occur. Awareness of these trade-
offs may help decision-makers negotiate pathways to the future that provide a better
balance not only between these trade-offs but also between these two concepts. The
underlying theoretical framework suggests that sustainability and resiliency could
work together to transform our society. Alternatively, an unsustainable system that
is highly resilient may frustrate attempts to establish a new system.
Greening Main Street USA: Adapting Sustainability Indicators to Rural …
139
3
Methods
The methods applied within this research combine the use of a meta-analysis in an
attempt to investigate the relationship between sustainability and resiliency. This
research incorporates part of Glass’ (1976) deﬁnition where an analysis occurs of “a
large collection of analysis results from individual studies for the purpose of inte-
gratingtheﬁndings”.ThisresearchalsoincorporatedCooper’s(1982)suggestionthat
rigorous methods must be used in the “process of collecting and coding studies”. The
conceptualization and creation of this research process can be broken down into the
same ﬁve stages that Cooper (1982) utilized: “problem formulation, data collection,
evaluation of data points, data analysis and interpretation, and the presentation of
results.” The meta-analysis for this research began by examining the Web of Science
database. First, a search conducted on the Web of Science database for “sustain-
ability indicators” resulted in 3,075 article results. Furthermore, this research only
searched the database Web of Science for “sustainability indicators”, limiting this
research to only containing Web of Science available articles. The assessment of
the Web of Science database implemented two notes made by Seuring and Müller
(2008) and used (1) only peer-reviewed scientiﬁc journals in English and (2) did not
use publications from known predatory journals. Applying these two steps narrowed
the scope of the study to 659 articles.
Individual indicators from each article formed the initial indicator dataset. Consol-
idation of duplicate indicators that stated the same thing such as “voter participation”
across multiple articles, or if the indicators measured the same thing, just worded
differently, such as “percent change in the forest area” and “rate of forest deple-
tion” occurred. Additionally, “vague” indicators appeared consistently throughout
the previous literature as articles discussed indicators as a broad category such as
“education” instead of focusing on a more detailed issue within the category such as
“number of students entering the primary education last year, according to gender”
(Jeníček 2013). Deciphering which indicators to incorporate led to the creation
of a 393 indicator meta-sustainability index, creating a comprehensive account of
sustainable development.
4
Results
Continued research investigating the interconnectedness of resiliency and sustain-
ability will require signiﬁcant intellectual curiosity. A variety of indicators already
exist that have been developed either under the guise of sustainability indicators or
resiliency indicators. The more problematic process will be consolidating the two
differing literatures given the historical disagreement of normative values, primary
ﬁelds of study, and diversity of geographic areas that could be studied. Equally
important, the likelihood that sustainability frameworks and resiliency frameworks
utilize the same indicators is, in our opinion, high. That does not necessarily mean
140
A. Shewmaker et al.
that sustainability and resiliency are, or should be, the same concept. Instead, it is
much more likely that resiliency, the “ordinary magic” of the individual working or
organizing at the sub-system level, may not be measurable. It does not mean that the
phenomena do not exist. Therefore, we recommend a research agenda that acts to
identify, consolidate, and classify the nature and type of each indicator.
A preliminary analysis attempted this analysis for communities located in rural
Texas (Shewmaker 2023). Texas serves as an interesting example when attempting to
assess sustainability utilizing ecoregions within the United States in that it provides
the second largest land mass, the second largest population, and the largest number
of Level 3 ecoregions within the continental United States at twelve. Texas would
not necessarily rank highly in the public recognition of sustainability initiatives, yet
these projects and initiatives do occur regularly.
5
Conclusions
While this work did not construct new theoretical insights per se, two generative
conclusions emerged from this project. The ﬁrst is that sustainability indicators
dominate resiliency indicators at the system and the sub-system level. This ﬁnding
may have two reasons: research predominantly focuses on sustainability indicators.
Resilience indicators, those that deal with a shock to the system or recovery from a
disaster,maybehardertoconceptualizeandmeasure.Thisisperhapsnotassurprising
as it ﬁrst appears. Recalling that one of Marchese et al. (2018)’s frameworks involved
the supposition that sustainability and resiliency are effectively the same concept,
it may not be so surprising that the indicators reﬂect this conceptual conundrum.
Additionally, the nature of resiliency, especially at the sub-system level, as ordinary
magic reﬂected by individuals may defy easy measurement by an indicator system.
This may be especially relevant when dealing with areas where there may be fewer
people and more livestock and feral animals.
A second signiﬁcant conclusion of this project is that the current body of literature
dealing with sustainability and resiliency indicators is highly duplicative, vague, and
generic. Even relatively similar concepts such as improving water quality may be
expressed in differing formats. For example, water quality appeared in multiple arti-
clesaseitherthepopulationwithaccesstodrainageandwastewatertreatmentsystems
or as independent indicators that speciﬁed the pollutant in the water. Isolating indica-
tors generated to be compatible across geographical locations that were nevertheless
unique to any singular ecosystem was nearly impossible.
The problem is not a lack of indicators, the problem is an overabundance thereof.
Michelina et al. (2021) pointed out that the number of indicator choices may be in
the hundreds for urban indices. In the absence of the constraint limiting the indi-
cator selection process to cities, Shewmaker’s (2023) research demonstrated that
this number may be dramatically understated with an initial indicator selection
process that numbered in the thousands and continues to rise. The impact of this
Greening Main Street USA: Adapting Sustainability Indicators to Rural …
141
overwhelming number of possibilities for indicators on researchers may be signiﬁ-
cant. Referring to Steiniger et al.’s four step methodology, step 1 involves indicator
selection (2013) that either comes from previous efforts or injects new indicators
into an already crowded ﬁeld. As the number of works increases, this task becomes
increasingly difﬁcult given the sheer volume of indicators to review.
We are not suggesting an end to research studying local and regional areas, espe-
cially ones that focus on environmental boundaries as well as political boundaries.
There are too few studies, especially in rural regions in both the developing South and
the developed North, for our comfort. We merely note that the absence of consis-
tency in the literature more dramatically impacts scholars who experience more
resource constraints in the areas of time and money. We also express our concern that
recirculating generic or vague indicators focused on urban communities may yield
diminishing returns. In the end, it may not matter much if one person calculated the
penetration of renewable energy by measuring the amount of government buildings
with solar panels while another person calculated the same target by measuring the
number of buildings in the city with solar installations.
We point out that people around the globe are concerned about the same things—
unemployment and poverty, housing, water quality, access to water, and the source
of energy. These things tend to dominate sustainability frameworks. Recapitulating
(Opp and Saunders’ 2013) comment that the social pillar within sustainability has
been understudied, we suspect this would no longer be the case. Research has rushed
to ﬁll this gap in the years since the comment was ﬁrst made.
We note the absence of indicators that apply to unique items; while many studies
mentioned biodiversity, few indicators could capture details about the local ecore-
gion. For example, generic indicators exist that seek to measure the environmental
quality of any of the Texas ecoregions. One that applied to multiple ecoregions
included measuring the density of the trees. We are unconvinced that this indicator
sufﬁciently measures sustainability or resiliency. The Main Street America designa-
tion requires that cities have a unique quality about them, our indicators should reﬂect
this diversity as well. Tolstoy famously contended that all happy families are alike,
but sustainable and resilient communities succeed differently from one another.
References
Adger WN (2003) Building resilience to promote sustainability. IHDP Update 2:1–3
Ajilore O, Willingham Z (2019) Redeﬁning rural America. Center for American Progress
Atanada J (2018) Developing a social sustainability assessment framework. Sustain Cities Soc
44:237–252. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2018.09.023
Biermann F, Kanie N, Kim RE (2017) Global governance by goal-setting: the novel approach of
the un sustainable development goals. Curr Opin Environ Sustain 26–27:26–31. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cosust.2017.01.010
Birch EL (2002) Having a longer view on downtown living. J Am Plann Assoc 68(1):5–21. https://
doi.org/10.1080/01944360208977188/.
142
A. Shewmaker et al.
Chaskin R (2008) Resilience, community, and resilient communities: conditioning contexts and
collective action. Child Care Pract 14(1):65–74. https://doi.org/10.1080/13575270701733724
Dale VH, Kline KL, Richard TL, Karlen DL, Belden WW (2018) Bridging biofuel sustain-
ability indicators and ecosystem services through stakeholder engagement. Biomass Bioenergy
114:143–156. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biombioe.2017.09.016
Edwards C (2009) Resilient nation. Demos, London
Egelston AE (2013) Sustainable development: a history. Springer, Berlin
Egelston AE (2022) Worth saving: international diplomacy to protect the environment. Springer
International.
EPA (2013) Level III ecoregions of the continental United States: Corvallis, Oregon, US EPA.
https://gaftp.epa.gov/EPADataCommons/ORD/Ecoregions/us/Eco_Level_III_US.pdf
EskelinenT(2021)Interpretingthesustainabledevelopmentgoalsthroughtheperspectivesofutopia
and governance. Forum Dev Stud 48(2):179–197. https://doi.org/10.1080/08039410.2020.186
7889
Farrell BH, Twining-Ward L (2005) Seven steps towards sustainability: tourism in the context of
new knowledge. J Sustain Tour 31(2):109–122. https://doi.org/10.1080/09669580508668481
Fiksel J, Goodman I, Hecht A (2014) Resilience: navigating toward a sustainable future. Solut
5(5):38–47
Folke C, Carpenter SR, Walker B, Scheffer M, Chapin T, Rockström J (2010) Resilience thinking:
integrating resilience, adaptability and transformability. Ecol Soc 15(4):20. http://www.ecolog
yandsociety.org/vol15/iss4/art20/
Fukuda-Parr S (2004) Millennium development goals: why they matter. Glob Gov 10(4):395–402.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/27800537
Haider H, Hewage K, Umer A, Ruparathna R, Chhipi-Shrestha G, Culver K, Holland M, Kay J,
Sadiq R (2017) Sustainability assessment framework for small-sized urban neighbourhoods: an
application of fuzzy synthetic evaluation. Sustain Cities Soc 36:21–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.scs.2017.09.031
Hajer M, Nilsson M, Raworth K, Bakker P, Berkhout F, De Boer Y, Rockström J, Ludwig K, Kok
M (2015). Beyond cockpit-ism: four insights to enhance the transformative potential of the
sustainable development goals
Holden M (2006) Revisiting the local impact of community indicators projects: sustainable seattle
as prophet in its own land. Appl Res Q Life 1:253–277. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11482-007-
9020-8; Sustainability 7(2):1651–1660. https://doi.org/10.3390/su7021651.
Holling CS (1973) Resilience and sustainability of ecological systems. Annu Rev Ecol Evol Syst,
4(1):1–23. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.es.04.110173.000245
Jeníček V (2013) Modiﬁcation of sustainability indicators. Agr Econ-Czech (59)4:160–166
Kanie N,BiermannF(2017)Governingthroughgoals: sustainable development goalsasgovernance
innovation. The MIT Press
Klopp JM, Petretta DL (2017) The urban sustainable development goal: indicators, complexity and
the politics of measuring cities. Cities 63:92–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cities.2016.12.019
Lafferty W, Meadowcroft J (2000) Implementing sustainable development: strategies and initiatives
in high consumption and societies. Oxford University Press
Lehtonen M, Sébastien L, Bauler T (2016) The multiple roles of sustainability indicators in infor-
mational governance: between intended use and unanticipated inﬂuence. Curr Opin Environ
Sustain 18:1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2015.05.009
Leopold A (1949) A sand county almanac: and sketches here and there. Oxford University Press
Lew AA, Ng PT, Ni CC, Wu TC (2016) Community sustainability and resilience: similarities,
differences and indicators. Tour Geogr 18(1):18–27. https://doi.org/10.1080/14616688.2015.
1122664
Lewis PGT, Chiu WA, Nasser E, Proville J, Barone A, Danforth C, Kim B, Prozzi J, Craft E
(2023) Characterizing vulnerabilities to climate change across the United States. Environ Int
172:107772. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2023.107772
Greening Main Street USA: Adapting Sustainability Indicators to Rural …
143
Li X, Yang H, Jia J, Shen Y, Liu J (2021) Index system of sustainable rural development based on
the concept of ecological livability. Environ Impact Assess Rev 86:106478. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.eiar.2020.106478
Londe D, Cady S, Elmore RD, Fuhlendorf S (2022) Woody plant encroachment pervasive across
three socially and ecologically diverse ecoregions. Ecol Soc 27(3):11
Loveland T, Merchant J (2004) Ecoregions and ecoregionalization: geographical and ecological
perspectives. Environ Manag 34:S1–S13. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-003-5181-x
Luthar SS, Cicchetti D, Becker B (2000) The construct of resilience: a critical evaluation and
guidelines for future work. Child Dev 71:543–562. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8624.00164
LützkendorfT,BalouktsiM(2017)Assessingsustainableurbandevelopment:typologyofindicators
and sources of information. Procedia Environ Sci 38:546–553. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proenv.
2017.03.122
Lyytimäki J, Tapio P, Varho V, Söderman T (2013) The use, non-use and misuse of indicators
in sustainability assessment and communication. Int J Sustain Dev World Eco 20(5):385–393.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13504509.2013.834524
Maja PW, Meyer J, Von Solms S (2020) Development of Smart Rural Village Indicators in Line
with Industry 4.0. IESS Access 8:152017–152033
Marchese D, Reynolds E, Bates M, Morgan H, Clark SS, Linkov I (2018) Resilience and sustain-
ability:similaritiesanddifferencesinenvironmentalmanagementapplications.SciTotalEnviron
613–614:1275–1283. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.09.086
Mascarenhas A, Coelho P, Subtil E, Ramos T (2010) The role of common local indicators in
regional sustainability assessment. Ecol Indic 10(3):646–656. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.
2009.11.003
Masten AS (2001) Ordinary magic: resilience processes in development. Am Psychol 56(3):227–
238. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.56.3.227
Masten AS, Best KM, Garmezy N (1990) Resilience and development: contributions from the study
of children who overcome adversity. Dev Psychopathol 2(4):425–444. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0954579400005812
Matthews EC, Sattler M, Friedland C (2014) A critical analysis of hazard resilience measures within
sustainability assessment framework. Environ Impact Assess Rev 49:59–69
Mebratu D (1998) Sustainability and sustainable development: historical and conceptual review.
Environ Impact Assess Rev 18(6):493–520. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0195-9255(98)00019-5
Michalina D, Mederly P, Diefenbacher H, Held B (2021) Sustainable urban development: a review of
urban sustainability indicator frameworks. Sustainability 13(16):9348. https://doi.org/10.3390/
su13169348
Miola A, Schiltz F (2019) Measuring sustainability goals performance: how to monitor policy action
in the 2030 agenda implementation. Ecol Econ 164:106343. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.
2019.106373
Moreno Pires S, Fidélis T, Ramos T (2014) Measuring and comparing local sustainable development
through common indicators: constraints and achievements in practice. Cities 39:1–9. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cities.2014.02.003
Omnerik JM, Bailey RG (1997) Distinguishing between watersheds and ecoregions. J Am Water
Resour Assoc 33(5):935–949. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1752-1688.1997.tb04115.x
Opp SM, Saunders KL (2013) Pillar talk: local sustainability initiatives and policies in the United
States—ﬁnding evidence of the “three e’s”: economic development, environmental protection,
and social equity. Urban Aff Rev 49(5):678–717. https://doi.org/10.1177/1078087412469344
Rametsteiner E, Pülzl H, Alkan-Olsson J, Frederiksen P (2011) Sustainability indicator develop-
ment—science or political negotiation? Ecol Indic 11(1):61–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eco
lind.2009.06.009
Redman CL (2014) Should sustainability and resilience be combined or remain distinct pursuits?
Ecol Soc 19(2):37. https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-06390-190237
144
A. Shewmaker et al.
Roostaie S, Nawari N, Kibert CJ (2019) Sustainability and resilience: a review of deﬁnitions, rela-
tionships, and their integration into a combined building assessment framework. Build Environ
154:132–144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2019.02.042
Sachs J (2012) From millennium development goals to sustainable development goals. Lancet
379(9832):2206–2211. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60685-0
Sachs J (2015) Achieving the sustainable development goals. J Int Bus Ethics 8(2):53–62. http://
www.cibe.org.cn/uploadﬁle/2016/2016_04_14_11193686.pdf#page=53
Selman P (1998) Local agenda 21: substance or spin? J Environ Plan Manag 41(5):533–553. https://
doi.org/10.1080/09640569811443
Shewmaker A (2023) Sustainability implementation within rural Texas counties. [Master’s thesis,
Tarleton State University]. ProQuest Dissertations Publishing
Seuring S, Müller, M (2008) From a literature review to a conceptual framework for sustainable
supply chain management. J Clean Prod 16(15):1699–1710. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.
2008.04.020
Steiniger S, Wagemann E, de la Barrera F, Molinos-Senante M, Villegas R, de la Fuente H, Vives A,
Arce G, Herrera J-C, Carrasco J-A, Pastén PA, Muñoz J-C, Barton JR (2020) Localising urban
sustainability indicators: the CEDEUS indicator set, and lessons from an expert-driven process.
Cities 101:102683. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cities.2020.102683
UN General Assembly (2015) Transforming our world: the 2030 agenda for sustainable develop-
ment. A/RES/70/1
United States Census Bureau (2017) What is rural America? https://www.census.gov/library/sto
ries/2017/08/rural-america.html. Accessed on July 29, 2024.
vanLeuvenAJ(2022)Theimpactofmainstreetrevitalizationontheeconomicvitalityofsmall-town
business districts. Econ Dev Q 36(3):193–207
Walker B (2020) Resilience: what it is and is not. Ecol Soc. https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-11647-
250211
Walker B, Salt D (2006) Resilience thinking: sustaining ecosystems and people in a changing world.
Island Press
Walker B, Carpenter S, Anderies J, Abel N, Cumming G, Janssen M, Lebel L, Norberg J,
PetersonGD,PritchardR(2002)Resiliencemanagementinsocial-ecologicalsystems:aworking
hypothesis for a participatory approach. Conserv Ecol 6(1):14
Walker B, Holling CS, Carpenter SR, Kinzig A (2004) Resilience, adaptability and transforma-
bility in social-ecological systems. Ecol Soc 9(2):5. https://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol9/
iss2/art5/
White MA (2013) Sustainability: i know it when i see it. Ecol Econ 86:213–217. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ecolecon.2012.12.020
World Commission on Environment and Development (1987) Our common future. Oxford
University Press
Zhao F, Zhang S, Du Q, Ding J, Luan G, Xie Z (2021) Assessment of the sustainable development
of rural minority settlements based on multidimensional data and geographical detector method:
a case study in Dehong, China. Socio-Econ Plan Sci 78:101066. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seps.
2021.101066
The Impact of Monetary Policy
on Climate Change: A Systematic
Literature Review and Future Research
Recommendations
Nadeen Omar and Dina Yousri
Abstract Central banks’ efforts in combating climate change are now a rising topic
of discussion. Until recently, environmental concerns were not the focus of central
banks’ policies. As of writing this chapter, some central banks have already taken
action to address climate change. However, this topic is highly debated as it is seen
as a threat to central banks’ policy effectiveness: it puts the policies under political
pressure and risks their independence. To provide a comprehensive overview of the
existing research on the subject, we conducted a systematic literature review of 20
empirical studies. Despite its importance, the impact of monetary policy on climate
change has been understudied. This chapter summarizes the current debate and calls
for action to central banks to be involved in the climate change issue. Moreover,
the review seeks to inform policymakers about the potential impact of their policies
on climate change, offering a foundation for their decision-making. Therefore, this
review aims to not only summarize the existing empirical studies but also to suggest
directions for future research.
Keywords Central bank mandates · Central bank · Climate change · Mission
creep · Monetary policy · Systematic literature review
1
Introduction
Sustainable development, as it was ﬁrst deﬁned, is the concept of meeting present
needs without compromising future generations (Burton 1987). Promoting inclusive
and sustainable growth is a crucial element of the 2030 Agenda and its Sustain-
able Development Goals (SDGs). Governments are prioritizing sustainable economic
growth to integrate economic, social, and environmental dimensions of development,
N. Omar (B) · D. Yousri
German University in Cairo, New Cairo, Egypt
e-mail: Nadeen.emadeldin@guc.edu.eg
D. Yousri
e-mail: Dina.elsayed@guc.edu.eg
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_9
145
146
N. Omar and D. Yousri
especially in the face of economic crises like the Great Financial Crisis and the Covid-
19 pandemic (Pérez-Moreno et al. 2022). However, the debate surrounding the inclu-
sion of climate mandates within the operational mandate of central banks remains
controversial. The reason being the persistent questions regarding the effective-
ness and costs associated with implementing monetary policy measures to advance
environmental sustainability (Shobande 2022).
The main aim of ﬁscal and monetary policies is to stabilize economies. According
to growth literature, we can hypothesize a potential spillover from policies on the
environment. Therefore, it is an empirical question to investigate the impact of such
policies on the environment (Faria 1998). In the literature on environmental pollution,
a set of determinants are acknowledged, usually include: remittance inﬂows, aggre-
gate domestic demand consumption, and national income (Gassebner et al. 2011).
Considering that almost all acknowledged determinants affect economic growth and
subsequently the environment, it makes monetary policy a potential determinant. A
new strand of empirical literature empirically investigated monetary policy as one
of the determinants of climate change (Qingquan et al. 2020). However, the link
between monetary policy and the environment is under-studied (Aghabalayev and
Ahmad 2023).
Concurrently, as climate change issues have been on the rise, there is a call for
action to central banks to use their toolkit to mitigate the environmental crisis.
However, incorporating such environmental issues is argued to put their policies
under political pressure and risk their independence and policy effectiveness. The
framework developed in Qingquan et al. (2020) is the basis for most of the studies
in this review; it shows that contractionary monetary policy has a negative effect
on Carbon Dioxide (CO2) emissions due to its tightening effects on investment and
consumption while the opposite holds for expansionary monetary policy (Chishti
et al. 2021; Pradeep 2022; Zeraibi et al. 2022). To plan for the changing role of
central banks, we must learn how the standing mandates are affecting the climate
change issue.
1.1
Monetary Policy and Climate Change: Why Should
Central Banks Be Involved?
Greenhouse gas emissions dramatically increased since the 1960s, with 81% of
these emissions attributed to rising levels of CO2 gas emissions, making it the
most commonly used measure when econometrically modeling climate change. The
expected consequences of this phenomenon are wide-ranging and include the melting
of polar ice caps, rising sea levels, deterioration in environmental quality, damage
to agricultural crop production, and a range of other natural disasters in addition to
an increase in temperature, losses in human lives, and spread of diseases (Taha et al.
2022). As a result, the current strand of environmental research aim to determine
The Impact of Monetary Policy on Climate Change: A Systematic …
147
the contributing factors to CO2 emissions to help policy makers target the correct
variables to mitigate it (Chishti et al. 2021; Liguo et al. 2022; Nguyen et al. 2022).
The increasing environmental damage due to climate change is believed to even-
tually put the effectiveness of monetary policy at risk if global warming surpasses
a certain level; this is related to the instability it may cause to macro-ﬁnance and
sovereign risk. Hence, there is a call to action for Central banks to account for this
risk and to get involved in sustainability issues and mitigate climate change. This will
require an evolution in the role, governance, and mandate of central banks (Dikau
and Volz 2021).
Climate change threatens ﬁnancial stability through market risks, reduced ﬁrm
proﬁtability, loan default, and asset price deﬂation. After the ﬁnancial crisis, central
banks, such as the European Central Bank (ECB), used unconventional monetary
policy measures to rescue economies, such as unlimited provision of liquidity to
banks with ﬁxed interest rates, long-term reﬁnancing operations, extension of assets
accepted as collateral, liquidity swaps, and asset and bond purchases (Hilmi et al.
2022). This raised the question of how central banks can allocate their resources
and direct their policies in a way that balances economic growth and environmental
stability (Ullah et al. 2021).
Recent research explores the inﬂuence monetary policy has on CO2 emissions
(Chishti et al. 2021). As monetary policy targets price stability and growth, it is
expected that monetary policy potentially impacts CO2 emissions. This transmis-
sion is hypothesized to occur through energy consumption, innovation, aggregate
demand consumption, ﬁnancial development, and income level (Nguyen et al. 2022);
when contractionary monetary policy is employed, central banks increase interest
rates, making borrowing more expensive. This, in turn, reduces in aggregate demand,
production, and fossil fuel consumption, and ultimately, lowers CO2 emission levels.
The opposite is true for an expansionary monetary policy (Jiang et al. 2021).
Hence, expansionary policies are hypothesized to be associated with higher levels
of emissions. However, central banks’ policies cannot substitute climate policies,
as this intervention can cause ﬁnancial disruptions making it an unsuitable tool to
combat climate change (Shobande 2022). Nevertheless, there is a push towards the
idea that central banks should consider the environment and climate-related ﬁnancial
risks (Nguyen et al. 2022). The main recommendation is to adopt green monetary
policy that encourages green ﬁnance (Mahmood et al. 2022).
1.2
Are Central Banks Taking Action?
Since 2019, a number of central banks have begun to recognize the issue and explic-
itly acknowledge it in their public communication. The ﬁrst San Francisco Federal
Reserve convention marked the ﬁrst-ever Economics of Climate Change conference
in November 2019 (Pradeep 2022). In 2021, the ECB introduced a plan towards
mitigating climate risks and is strongly committed to considering climate change in
monetary policy (European Central Bank 2021).
148
N. Omar and D. Yousri
Dikau and Volz (2021) provide a report of the central bank mandates and highlight
thecentralbanksthathaveexplicitlyadjustedtheirmandatetoaddressclimatechange
and green policies, the implicit ones, and the ones of no mention at all. Out of
their analysis of 135 central banks’ mandates, 12% adopted the idea explicitly in
their mandates (that is, to promote sustainable growth), and 40% support national
policy objectives without interfering with their primary objective (that is mostly price
stability). Those 2 categories totaled to 70 central banks. One central bank with no
explicit mention of sustainability in their mandate is the Bank of England, yet they
are taking action to combat climate change. This is regarded as over-stepping their
mandate, too political, and referred to as “mission creep”. Dikau and Volz (2021)
continue to highlight that the central banks with sustainable growth in their objectives
did not intend to include climate change, however, with the rising sustainability issues
it falls under their mandates.
To plan for the changing role of central banks, we have to learn how the standing
mandates are affecting the Climate Change issue. This review is an attempt at a
comprehensive summary of all empirical studies done on the impact of monetary
policy on climate change. Despite its importance, this topic is understudied, thus, we
aim to draw some future research recommendations. Additionally, inform policy-
makers of the potential impact of their policies on climate change and help provide
a base to support their decisions to include this issue in their mandates.
2
Methodology
To provide a research summary that serves as a steppingstone for future studies and
policy makers, a qualitative research design has been adopted (Palmatier et al. 2018).
The review was conducted in accordance with Tranﬁeld et al. (2003), Palmatier
et al. (2018), and Snyder (2019). With this review, we have two aims: ﬁrst, to
encourage future research building upon earlier studies on this topic. Second, we
aim to showcase the diversity and critically evaluate the methods and results of our
sample.
For this purpose, we chose a systematic review, as it is regarded to be the most
efﬁcient and high-quality method to evaluate the existing literature in a given ﬁeld
(Tranﬁeld et al. 2003). Systematic reviews are considered the “gold standard” as they
follow a detailed and transparent procedure, with explicit inclusion and exclusion
criteria and documented steps that aim to minimize bias and encourage replicating
the procedure (Palmatier et al. 2018; Snyder 2019). Table 1 lists the answer to each
step from Snyder (2019).
The ﬁltering process is shown in Fig. 1: ﬁrst, the research question was formulated,
followed by retrieving articles from the Scopus Database which is categorized as
one of the largest citation index platforms. Next, we removed any duplicates and
irrelevant articles. While there were no duplicates, we scanned the titles and abstracts
and excluded 98 articles that were either irrelevant or theoretical. After this stage,
we were left with 20 articles. Following that, the articles were ﬁltered through a
The Impact of Monetary Policy on Climate Change: A Systematic …
149
Table 1 SLR phases adapted from Snyder (2019)
Phase
Design
• Previous systematic reviews cease to exist
• Potential audience whom we aim to make “evidence aware” (Tranﬁeld et al.
2003): Academics, policy researchers, and to assist Central Banks with their
decision
• Method: Systematic Literature Review
• To answer the question “What is the impact of monetary policy on climate
change?”
• Search strategy: Scopus Database, all available years, published articles, in
English, that includes the words “monetary policy” OR “central bank
policies” AND “climate change” OR “emissions” OR “environmental
impact” in its title, abstract or keywords
• Inclusion/exclusion criteria: we only included empirical studies testing the
impact of monetary policy on climate change
Conduct
• Practical plan: an extensive review of the abstracts of all retrieved articles
(118). Removed any irrelevant articles on different topics. Next, we read the
full text of the remaining articles from this stage and excluded any articles
that were either theoretical or testing for a different relationship
• In the process of inclusion/exclusion, we utilized a table to document our
decisions and further documented the process in the ﬂow chart in Fig. 1
• We ensured the quality of the process by looking in the Scopus database and
including high-quality journal publications
Analysis
• We extracted from the empirical studies the following information: Author,
year, theory, data (sample/context), methods, and results
• Documentation: Data extraction form and a descriptive account of the ﬁeld
Structuring and
writing
• We made sure to include a summary of all results and conclusions, key
emerging themes and theories, and a critical review
full-text reading. The remainders were 16 articles that were empirical studies testing
the effect of monetary policy on climate change. Hence, four articles were removed
as they were either theoretical papers or testing a different relationship, such as
CO2 and inﬂation. During the full-text reading, four in-text citations of articles were
found that were not originally retrieved from the Scopus database (two articles from
Aghabalayev and Ahmed 2023 and two articles from Pradeep 2022). Therefore, the
ﬁnal total of included articles in our review is 20 empirical studies.
3
Results
Out of the extensive reading of the included empirical studies, the extracted data
is provided in Annex 1. The ﬁrst study from our sample was published in 2019.
Over the subsequent years, the topic has garnered more attention, with the highest
number of studies being conducted by 2022. It is important to note that the sample
of studies was collected at the beginning of 2023, hence the low number of studies
for 2023. However, we anticipate that the number of studies will be higher than that
150
N. Omar and D. Yousri
Fig. 1 Search and screening
results
of 2022, given the increasing trend and the growing attention received by the topic.
The remainder of this section discusses the conceptual foundation and descriptive
account of data, methods, and results of the sample of publications.
3.1
Conceptual Foundation
Two concepts underlie most models of this relationship, namely the Environmental
Kuznets curve hypothesis (EKC) and the Cobb–Douglas production function. EKC
hypothesis is used to explain the relationship between income and pollution. Kuznet
hypothesized that as income increases; pollution goes up to a certain threshold,
beyond which it decreases as income continues to increase (Chishti et al. 2021;
Pradeep 2022; Zeraibi et al. 2022). Furthermore, as higher economic activity is
linked to higher CO2 emissions, CO2 emissions can be integrated into the Cobb–
Douglas model, along with monetary policy, as shown by Qingquan et al. (2020).
Noureen et al. (2022) include real cash balance into the Cobb–Douglas production
The Impact of Monetary Policy on Climate Change: A Systematic …
151
function, and the expected effect on production is positive, as ﬁrms have better access
to capital, leading to increased production.
Most of the reviewed empirical studies are built on the framework by Qingquan
et al. (2020). The framework shows the spillover of contractionary and expansionary
monetary policy. In the case of an expansionary monetary policy; reduced interest
rates lead to higher consumption, borrowing power, aggregate demand, and produc-
tion. This increased production may result in producers using cheaper fossil fuels
or non-clean energy, leading to higher CO2 emissions. Conversely, contractionary
monetary policy, with declining income, money supply, and aggregate demand, leads
to reduced production and fossil fuel consumption, resulting in lower CO2 levels.
(Mahmood et al. 2022; Nguyen et al. 2022; Noureen et al. 2022; Zeraibi et al. 2022;
Aghabalayev and Ahmad 2023).
From the literature, the relationship suggested is that contractionary monetary
policy is a climate change mitigator. However, other literature frames it as a disruptor
of technological innovation. So, if we consider technological innovation to improve
climate-relatedissues,thentheeffectofcontractionarymonetarypolicyisneutralized
or partially offset. A suggested remedy is “greening” monetary policy by setting
lower interest rates for investors in green projects to encourage further technological
innovations and transition to clean resources (Zeraibi et al. 2022).
On the other hand, expansionary monetary policy is hypothesized to reduce capital
costs, making clean investments more proﬁtable when calculating the net value of
the project. However, there is an opposing argument that a low interest rate means
less costly production, which reduces the incentive to transform into clean production
since the high carbon emission penalty may go unnoticed. This is particularly relevant
as lower interest rate (expansionary policy) positively impacts investment levels, as
well as, energy consumption, innovation, and economic activity (Zhang et al. 2023).
Three channels are suggested for the spillover that the real interest rate could have
on CO2 emissions. First, through the effect on the cost of ﬁnance, as a lower interest
rate lowers the cost of ﬁnance, this is likely to lead to higher investment, production,
and energy consumption, resulting in higher CO2 emissions. Second, through foreign
direct investment (FDI) and trade, as a lower interest rate leads to higher real income,
this will result in higher energy consumption and, therefore, higher CO2 emissions.
Third, as a lower interest rate means a lower cost of lending, more consumer loans
will lead to higher consumption of automobiles and electric machines, which is likely
to contribute to CO2 emissions (Isiksal et al. 2019; Aghabalayev and Ahmad 2023).
We should acknowledge the other side of the debate that is not in support of
involving central banks in mitigating climate change; it is believed it will affect
the effectiveness of monetary policy. This side of the argument is concerned about
“carbon bubbles” and ﬁnancial instability that may occur due to this intervention.
Shobande (2022) identiﬁes ﬁve ways through which this could occur: uncertainty
due to slowed down productivity, the risk of physical damage leading to a surge in
asset pricing, ﬁnancial turmoil due to mortgage borrowers’ default, and using the
monetary policy transmission channels (credit and interest rate channels) to promote
sustainable ﬁnance.
152
N. Omar and D. Yousri
3.2
Descriptive Account
3.2.1
Data
In modeling climate change in empirical studies (Table 2), Carbon Dioxide (CO2)
emissions is the most used measure (Zeraibi et al. 2022), although other measures
such as Methane and Nitrous emissions are also used (as in Noureen et al. 2022). In
our sample, all studies used CO2 emissions as the main indicator of climate change
and only use other measures to test the robustness of their statistical results.
Monetary policy is measured by either real interest rates (Isiksal et al. 2019;
Muhaﬁdin 2020; Qingquan et al. 2020; Chishti et al. 2021; Hilmi et al. 2022; Huang
et al. 2022; Jiang et al. 2021; Nguyen et al. 2022; Noureen et al. 2022; Shobande
Table 2 Articles grouped by data
Measuring monetary policy
Articles
Real interest rate
• Isiksal et al. (2019)
• Muhaﬁdin (2020)
• Qingquan et al. (2020)
• Chishti et al. (2021)
• Jiang et al. (2021)
• Hilmi et al. (2022)
• Huang et al. (2022)
• Nguyen et al. (2022)
• Noureen et al. (2022)
• Shobande (2022)
• Xin et al. (2022)
• Liguo et al. (2022)
• Aghabalayev and Ahmad (2023)
• Zhang et al. (2023)
Discount rate
• Mughal et al. (2021)
• Ullah et al. (2021)
Monetary policy uncertainty
• Alola (2019)
Monetary aggregate
• Hilmi et al. (2022)
• Zeraibi et al. (2022)
Interbank interest rate
• Pradeep (2022)
Lending interest rate
• Zhang et al. (2023)
Credit
• Shobande (2022)
Unconventional monetary policy (Green-labeled bonds
(GLB) and Asset Purchase Programs (APP))
• Hilmi et al. (2022)
Measuring climate change
Articles
CO2 emissions
• All studies
GHG emissions
• Zhang et al. (2023)
Other emissions
• Noureen et al. (2022)
The Impact of Monetary Policy on Climate Change: A Systematic …
153
2022; Xin et al. 2022; Liguo et al. 2022; Aghabalayev and Ahmad 2023; Zhang et al.
2023) or monetary aggregates (Hilmi et al. 2022; Zeraibi et al. 2022).
Some articles also consider discount rates (Mughal et al. 2021; Ullah et al.
2021), lending rates (Zhang et al. 2023), interbank interest rates (Pradeep 2022),
and measures of credit (Shobande 2022). One study by Hilmi et al. (2022) exam-
ines the impact of unconventional monetary policy (using green-labeled bonds and
asset purchase program) on CO2 emissions. Additionally, Alola (2019) focuses on
monetary policy uncertainty.
In the tested contexts, the majority of studies focus on Asian countries (Muhaﬁdin
2020; Qingquan et al. 2020; Pradeep 2022; Ullah et al. 2021; Zeraibi et al. 2022;
Zhang et al. 2023) and developing economies (Isiksal et al. 2019; Chishti et al. 2021;
Mughal et al. 2021; Mahmood et al. 2022; Nguyen et al. 2022; Noureen et al. 2022;
Shobande 2022).
Three studies examine the US context (Alola 2019; Xin et al. 2022; Liguo et al.
2022), two articles analyze a panel of EU countries (Hilmi et al. 2022; Huang et al.
2022), one study explores the G7 economies (Aghabalayev and Ahmad 2023), and
one article focuses on Australia (Jiang et al. 2021).
3.2.2
Methods
Regarding the methods (Table 3) the most commonly employed are Fully-modiﬁed
OLS (FM-OLS) (Chishti et al. 2021; Jiang et al. 2021; Nguyen et al. 2022; Mahmood
et al. 2022; Zeraibi et al. 2022; Xin et al. 2022; Liguo et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2023),
Dynamic OLS (D-OLS) (Chishti et al. 2021; Jiang et al. 2021; Nguyen et al. 2022;
Mahmood et al. 2022; Zeraibi et al. 2022; Xin et al. 2022; Liguo et al. 2022), and
Autoregressive Distributed Lag model (ARDL) or Pooled mean group for panel
(Alola 2019; Isiksal et al. 2019; Muhaﬁdin 2020; Chishti et al. 2021; Pradeep 2022;
Mahmood et al. 2022; Zeraibi et al. 2022).
The assumption of asymmetry was only tested in two articles using the NARDL
methodology (Ullah et al. 2021; Mughal et al. 2021). Although the VAR methodology
is widely used for analyzing monetary policy, its usage is scarce in the sample.
Moreover, no threshold models were employed. However, the articles that build on
the EKC hypothesis included a squared variable to account for the threshold factor
(Chishti et al. 2021; Pradeep 2022; Zeraibi et al. 2022). Additionally, some studies
examined Granger causality and found a signiﬁcant causal relationship in most of
the studies (Muhaﬁdin 2020; Chishti et al. 2021; Shobande 2022; Huang et al. 2022;
Liguo et al. 2022; Zeraibi et al. 2022).
3.2.3
Findings
Most of the studies concluded that a lower interest rate (expansionary monetary
policy) is associated with a higher level of CO2 emissions, while the opposite is true
for a higher interest rate (contractionary monetary policy). These studies are: Isiksal
154
N. Omar and D. Yousri
Table 3 Articles grouped by methodology
Method
Articles
OLS
• Chishti et al. (2021)
• Nguyen et al. (2022)
• Mahmood et al. (2022)
ARDL/PMG
• Alola (2019)
• Isiksal et al. (2019)
• Muhaﬁdin (2020)
• Chishti et al. (2021)
• Pradeep (2022)
• Mahmood et al. (2022)
• Zeraibi et al. (2022)
NARDL
• Ullah et al. (2021)
• Mughal et al. (2021)
Granger causality
• Muhaﬁdin (2020)
• Chishti et al. (2021)
• Shobande (2022)
• Liguo et al. (2022)
• Huang et al. (2022)
• Zeraibi et al. (2022)
CS-ARDL
• Noureen et al. (2022)
• Huang et al. (2022)
• Aghabalayev and Ahmad (2023)
FMOLS
• Chishti et al. (2021)
• Jiang et al. (2021)
• Nguyen et al. (2022)
• Mahmood et al. (2022)
• Zeraibi et al. (2022)
• Xin et al. (2022)
• Liguo et al. (2022)
• Zhang et al. (2023)
DOLS
• Chishti et al. (2021)
• Jiang et al. (2021)
• Nguyen et al. (2022)
• Mahmood et al. (2022)
• Zeraibi et al. (2022)
• Xin et al. (2022)
• Liguo et al. (2022)
Panel VAR/VEC
• Shobande (2022)
PFM-LS and PD-LS
• Qingquan et al. (2020)
GMM
• Nguyen et al. (2022)
Panel quantile regression
• Nguyen et al. (2022)
RE panel model + Binary models
• Hilmi et al. (2022)
Canonical cointegration regression
• Jiang et al. (2021)
• Zeraibi et al. (2022)
• Xin et al. (2022)
• Liguo et al. (2022)
(continued)
The Impact of Monetary Policy on Climate Change: A Systematic …
155
Table 3 (continued)
Method
Articles
ECM
• Aghabalayev and Ahmad (2023)
VECM
• Isiksal et al. (2019)
• Zeraibi et al. (2022)
et al. (2019) found that the real interest rate has a negative effect on CO2 emis-
sions in Turkey. Supporting these results, Qingquan et al. (2020) found a long-term
cointegration between monetary policy and CO2 emissions in a selected sample of
Asian economies. The coefﬁcients supported the idea that an expansionary mone-
tary policy increases CO2 emissions, while a contractionary monetary policy reduces
CO2 emissions in the long run.
Also, Chishti et al. (2021) tested the impact of monetary policy on CO2 emis-
sions in the BRICS economies and found that expansionary monetary policy esca-
lates CO2 emissions, whereas contractionary policy has the opposite effect. Nguyen
et al. (2022) tested the impact of contractionary and expansionary monetary poli-
cies on CO2 emissions for a sample of 14 emerging economies. The results showed
that expansionary monetary policy escalates CO2 emissions, whereas contractionary
policy has the opposite effect. The quantile regression showed that the effects appear
in the middle and large quantiles of CO2 levels.
Xin et al. (2022), in the context of the US, found that expansionary monetary
policy (proxied by the real interest rate) has a positive impact on CO2 emissions.
In addition, they found a one-way causality from expansionary monetary policy to
CO2 emissions. Aghabalayev and Ahmad (2023), in the context of G7 states, found
that expansionary monetary policy increases CO2 emissions, whereas contractionary
monetary policy decreases CO2 emissions.
Noureen et al. (2022), for a selected sample of developing countries, showed that
expansionary monetary policy worsens environmental quality (increases emissions)
whereas contractionary monetary policy improves it (reduces emissions). Huang
et al. (2022), for a sample of EU countries, concluded that expansionary monetary
policy increases CO2 emissions, whereas contractionary monetary policy showed
the opposite impact.
Liguo et al. (2022), in the context of the US, found that expansionary monetary
policy (proxied by the real interest rate) has a positive impact on CO2 emissions.
Jiang et al. (2021), in the context of Australia, found a signiﬁcant long-term positive
relationship between expansionary monetary policy and CO2 emissions.
On the other hand, three studies found that expansionary monetary policy (lower
interest rate) is associated with a lower level of CO2 emissions, while the oppo-
site is true for contractionary monetary policy (higher interest rate). These studies
are Pradeep (2022) showed that interest rate has a signiﬁcant positive impact on
per-capita emissions in the long and short run. Muhaﬁdin (2020), in the context
of Indonesia, showed a positive signiﬁcant relationship between the interest rate
156
N. Omar and D. Yousri
and CO2 emissions. Zeraibi et al. (2022), in the context of China, concluded that
expansionary monetary policy lowered CO2 emissions in the long and short run.
Two studies yielded mixed results: Mahmood et al. (2022), in the context of the
GCC economies, found a negative long-term impact and a positive short-term impact
between money supply and CBC (Consumption-Based CO2) and TBC (Territory-
Based CO2). Zhang et al. (2023), for a panel of 9 Asian economies, found cointe-
gration between the variables and that expansionary monetary policy increases the
level of clean energy investment, but the relationship between CO2 emissions and
clean energy investments differed when testing for developing countries; while it is
positive for the full sample, it turns negative when testing for developing countries
only.
Some articles took different approaches (assuming asymmetry, including mone-
tary policy uncertainty, and unconventional monetary policy). Alola (2019), in the
context of the United States, found a positive cointegrating relationship between CO2
emissions and monetary policy uncertainty. The results showed that the relationship
was positive in the short and long run. Hilmi et al. (2022) examined the impact
of quantitative easing on CO2 emissions in a panel of 13 European countries. The
results revealed a positive relationship between green-labeled bonds (GLB) and CO2
emissions, while other measures were found to be insigniﬁcant.
Ullah et al. (2021), in Pakistan, found an asymmetric impact in the long run,
where contractionary policies worsened environmental quality (increase CO2 emis-
sions) while expansionary policies had no signiﬁcant effect. Mughal et al. (2021)
concluded that expansionary monetary policy had a positive impact on CO2 emis-
sions, while contractionary monetary policy had the opposite effect in a sample of
ASEAN countries.
Several studies investigated the Granger Causality between monetary policy
and CO2 emissions and reached various conclusions on the direction of causality.
Shobande (2022) conducted research on a panel of 6 East African countries and iden-
tiﬁed a unidirectional causality from the credit channel to CO2 emissions. They also
observed a bidirectional impact between the interest rate channel and CO2 emis-
sions. Moreover, they concluded that the trade, agriculture, and energy consump-
tion channels were the main mechanisms through which monetary policy impacted
CO2 emissions. Huang et al. (2022) studied a sample of EU countries and found
evidence of a one-way causality from expansionary monetary policy to CO2 emis-
sions. Liguo et al. (2022) focused on the US and discovered a unidirectional causality
from expansionary monetary policy to CO2 emissions.
Muhaﬁdin (2020), in the Indonesian context, found a bidirectional causal rela-
tionship between interest rates and CO2 emissions. Zeraibi et al. (2022) investigated
China and found evidence of a bidirectional causal relationship between M2 supply
and CO2 emissions in the long run. However, in the short run, there was evidence of
unidirectional causality from money supply to CO2 emissions. Finally, Chishti et al.
(2021) studied the BRICS economies and concluded that there is a unidirectional
causality from contractionary and expansionary monetary policy to CO2 emissions.
The Impact of Monetary Policy on Climate Change: A Systematic …
157
4
Discussion
A general impression is that the articles yield similar conclusions, but there is a
lack of policy implications to effectively utilize these ﬁndings. For example, if CO2
levels are lowered due to a contractionary monetary policy (CMP), then what steps
should be taken to address this? Implementing contractionary measures may not be
an appropriate solution to reducing CO2 emissions, at least not alone. Additionally,
it is worth examining whether the volatility associated with expansionary monetary
policies contributes to its positive association with carbon emissions. In other words,
we should explore the question if uncertainty plays a role in ﬁrms’ inclination to
use dirty or non-clean technologies for production. This question can be extended to
explore if the risk associated with unconventional expansionary measures inﬂuence
the choice of production methods?
The choice of contexts in the literature was well elaborated, with a focus on Asian
economies that are known to have the highest share of CO2 emissions. We further
recommend conducting a comparison between high and low-emission economies as
wellasacomparisonbetweenpanelsofdevelopedvs.developingeconomies.Further,
we would recommend more research to be done on the impact of unconventional
monetarypolicymeasuresonclimatechangeandutilizingawidervarietyofmeasures
for said variables. While the literature agrees that the effect of monetary policy
on CO2 emissions is indirect, there is no clear consensus on the mediator factors.
Understanding the link between these two variables is integral to provide valuable
policy implications.
A ﬁnal note: it is important to consider the conceptual aspects of this argument,
(i.e. central bank independence). Before recommending the use of monetary policy
to address the climate issue, these considerations should be acknowledged and thor-
oughly examined. The participation of all institutions and organizations in mitigating
climate change is vital, but given that central banks are the moderator of the monetary
system of any economy, it is particularly crucial to closely scrutinize the role of the
central bank. Therefore, any additional responsibilities assigned to the central bank
should be carefully considered and researched.
For future research, we suggest the following research gaps to build upon the
previous research on this topic:
1. Investigatethemediatingfactorsthatinﬂuencetherelationshipbetweenmonetary
policies and CO2 emissions, such as output and clean energy investment, as well
as income inequality.
2. Examine the impact of central bank announcements on corporate actions to
reduce CO2 emissions and actual levels of CO2 emissions.
3. Explore the potential policy measures that can effectively utilize the ﬁndings of
the relationship between monetary policies and CO2 emissions.
4. Analyze the role of volatility associated with expansionary monetary policies in
ﬁrms’ inclination to use dirty or non-clean technologies for production.
158
N. Omar and D. Yousri
5. Conduct further studies comparing high and low-emission economies, as well as
panels of developed versus developing economies, to enhance the understanding
of the topic.
6. Investigate the impact of unconventional monetary policy measures on climate
change and consider utilizing a wider variety of measures for monetary policy
and climate change variables.
7. Work towards a framework to be used in the relationship between monetary
policy and CO2 emissions.
8. Employ more studies with high frequency data given the nature of the interest
rate volatility.
9. Explore the spillover effects of monetary policy for large economies such as the
United States on the level of emissions in other economies.
5
Conclusion
This extensive review of the literature yielded to some insights, most importantly, it
showcased the scarcity of research on this topic. One limitation of this review is that
focused mainly on the direct relationship between monetary policies and CO2 emis-
sions. However, it is important to consider other factors that may mediate this rela-
tionship, such as clean energy investment (as discussed in Zhang et al. 2023). Another
key aspect to explore is the inﬂuence of a central bank announcement that calls for
action to mitigate climate change. Some questions to explore may include: Does this
announcement have an impact on corporate actions to reduce CO2 emissions? And,
does it have any effect on the actual levels of CO2 emissions?
Concurrent with the environmental threat, income disparity is widening across
nation. A series of empirical research started to investigate the potential link between
income inequality and climate change (Bai et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2023). The
importance of this discussion is ever increasing as both are SDGs set to be reached
by 2030, making it an urgent matter to explore. Given the strand of literature linking
income inequality and monetary policy (Omar and Richter, 2021), it is potentially
a next step to investigate the nexus between income inequality, climate change and
monetary policy.
To conclude, we endeavored to fulﬁll the points outlined in Palmatier et al. (2018)
and Snyder (2019) to the best of our abilities. To ensure depth and rigor, we remained
unbiased and provided full disclosure of our procedure. Our commitment to repli-
cability is evident in the documentation we provided of the entire process and the
decisions made at each step. Additionally, we placed importance on the usability of
this synthesis by offering implications and cohesive conclusions. After examining
20 empirical studies, we highly encourage further reviews as the research on this
topic gets richer, to contribute to the global move toward a sustainable future.
The Impact of Monetary Policy on Climate Change: A Systematic …
159
Annex 1: Data Extraction Form
#
Authors
Year
Context
Data
Methods
Conclusion
(increase ↑,
decrease↓)
1
Alola
2019 United States
(1990:
Q1-2018:Q2)
Monetary policy
uncertainty, CO2
ARDL
Monetary
policy
uncertainty ↑
CO2 ↑
2
Isiksal,
Samour and
Resatoglu
2019 Turkey
(1980–2014)
Real interest rate,
CO2 emissions
ARDL,
VECM
Real interest
rate ↑
CO2 ↓
3
Muhaﬁdin
2020 Indonesia
(1973–2018)
Real interest rate,
CO2
ARDL
Real interest
rate ↑
CO2 ↑
4
Qingquan,
Khattak,
Ahmad and
Ping
2020 Selected Asian
economies
(1990–2014)
Real interest rate,
CO2
PFM-LS,
PD-LS
EMP ↑
CO2 ↑
While CMP ↑
CO2 ↓
5
Chishti,
Ahmad,
Rehman and
Khan
2021 BRICS economies
(1985–2014)
Real interest rate,
CO2 emissions
Panel OLS,
dynamic
OLS, fully
modiﬁed
OLS, PMG
EMP ↑
CO2 ↑
While CMP ↑
CO2 ↓
6
Mughal,
Kashif, Arif,
Guerrero,
Nabua and
Niedbala
2021 ASEAN
(1990–2019)
Discount rate, CO2
emissions
NARDL
EMP ↑
CO2 ↑
While CMP ↑
CO2 ↓
7
Jiang,
Khattak,
Ahmad and
Lin
2021 Australia (1972:
Q1 - 2014: Q4)
Real interest rate,
CO2 emissions
FMOLS,
DOLS
EMP ↑
CO2 ↑
While CMP ↑
CO2 ↓
8
Ullah, Ozturk
and Sohail
2021 Pakistan
(1985–2019)
Discount rate, CO2
emissions
NARDL
CMP ↑
CO2 ↑
While EMP ↑
Insigniﬁcant
impact on CO2
9
Pradeep
2022 India (1971–2014)
Interbank interest
rate, CO2 emissions
ARDL
Interest rate ↑
CO2 ↑
10 Hilmi,
Djoundourian,
Shahin, and
Safa
2022 A panel of 13
European
countries (January
2013–September
2018)
M3, Interest rate,
GLBs, APP, CO2
emissions
Binary
models
(Logit and
Probit)
M3 Interest rate
↑
GLBs ↑
CO2 ↑
11 Huang,
Saydaliev,
Iqbal and Irfan
2022 EU countries
(1990–2016)
Real interest rate,
CO2 emissions
CS-ARDL
EMP ↑
CO2 ↑
While CMP ↑
CO2 ↓
(continued)
160
N. Omar and D. Yousri
(continued)
#
Authors
Year
Context
Data
Methods
Conclusion
(increase ↑,
decrease↓)
12 Mahmood,
Adow, Abbas,
Iqbal,
Murshed and
Furqan
2022 Gulf Cooperation
Council (GCC)
economies
(1990–2019)
Broad money,
Territory-Based
CO2 (TBC) and
Consumption-Based
CO2 (CBC)
OLS,
Dynamic
OLS, Fully
Modiﬁed
OLS, PMG
Money supply
↑
TBC and CBC
emissions ↓
13 Nguyen, Tran,
Dinh, Hoang
and Duong
Thi Thuy
2022 A sample of 14
selected emerging
economies
(1998–2018)
Real interest rate,
CO2 emissions
OLS,
Dynamic
OLS, Fully
Modiﬁed
OLS, Panel
Quantile
Regression
EMP ↑
CO2 ↑
While CMP ↑
CO2 ↓
14 Noureen,
Iqbal and
Chishti
2022 Selected
developing
countries
(1990–2017)
Real interest rate,
CO2 emissions,
methane emission
(CH4), nitrous
(N2O) emissions
CS-ARDL
EMP ↑
CO2, CH4, and
N2O ↑
While CMP ↑
CO2, CH4, and
N2O ↓
15 Shobande
2022 A panel of six
EACs (Kenya,
Uganda, Tanzania,
Burundi, Rwanda,
and South Sudan)
(1990–2019)
Real interest rate
and credit channel
(credit), CO2
emissions
Panel
VAR/VEC
Credit and GDP
unidirectionally
Granger cause
CO2
16 Xin, Ahmad,
and Murshed
2022 USA (1990:
Q1–2018: Q4)
Real interest rate,
CO2 emissions
FMOLS,
DOLS
EMP ↑
CO2 ↑
While CMP ↑
CO2 ↓
17 Liguo,
Ahmad, and
Khattak
2022 USA
(1990Q1–2018Q4)
Real interest rate,
CO2 emissions
FMOLS,
DOLS
EMP ↑
CO2 ↑
While CMP ↑
CO2 ↓
18 Zeraibi,
Ahmed,
Shehzad,
Murshed,
Nathaniel, and
Mahmood
2022 China
(1980–2018)
M2 supply, CO2
emissions
ARDL,
DOLS,
FMOLS,
VECM
EMP ↑
CO2 ↓
19 Aghabalayev
and Ahmad
2023 G7 states
(1990–2020)
Real interest rate,
CO2 emissions
CS-ARDL,
ECM
EMP ↑
CO2 ↑
While CMP ↑
CO2 ↓
20 Zhang, Wang
and Peng
2023 9 Asian economies
(1996–2018)
Real interest rate,
lending interest rate,
CO2 emissions,
GHG emissions
FMOLS
EMP ↑
Clean solar
investment ↑
CO2 ↓
The Impact of Monetary Policy on Climate Change: A Systematic …
161
References
Aghabalayev F, Ahmad M (2023) Does innovation in ocean energy generations-related technolo-
gies in G7 countries reduce carbon dioxide emissions? role of international collaboration in
green technology development and commercial and monetary policies. Environ Sci Pollut Res
30(6):14545–14564. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-022-23081-x
Alola A (2019) The trilemma of trade, monetary and immigration policies in the United States:
accounting for environmental sustainability. Sci Total Environ 658:260–267. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.scitotenv.2018.12.212
Bai C, Feng C, Yan H, Yi X, Chen Z, Wei W (2020) Will income inequality inﬂuence the abatement
effect of renewable energy technological innovation on carbon dioxide emissions? J Environ
Manag 15(264):110482. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2020.110482
Burton I (1987) Report on reports: Our common future: the world commission on environment and
development. Environ Sci Policy Sustain Dev 29(5):25–29
Chishti MZ, Ahmad M, Rehman A, Khan MK (2021) Mitigations pathways towards sustainable
development: assessing the inﬂuence of ﬁscal and monetary policies on carbon emissions in
BRICS economies. J Clean Prod 292:126035. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.126035
Dikau S, Volz U (2021) Central bank mandates, sustainability objectives and the promotion of green
ﬁnance. Ecol Econ 184:107022. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2021.107022
European Central Bank (2021) ECB presents action plan to include climate change considerations
in its monetary policy strategy (in press). https://www.ecbeuropaeu/press/pr/date/2021/html/ecb
pr210708_1~f104919225enhtml
Faria JR (1998) Environment, growth and ﬁscal and monetary policies. Econ Model 15(1):113–123.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0264-9993(97)00016-3
Gassebner M, Lamla MJ, Sturm JE (2011) Determinants of pollution: what do we really know? Oxf
Econ Pap 63(3):568–595. https://doi.org/10.1093/oep/gpq029
Hilmi N, Djoundourian S, Shahin W, Safa A (2022) Does the ECB policy of quantitative easing
impact environmental policy objectives? J Econ Policy Reform 25(3):259–271. https://doi.org/
10.1080/17487870.2020.1855176
Huang W, Saydaliev HB, Iqbal W, Irfan M (2022) Measuring the impact of economic policies on
CO2 emissions: ways to achieve green economic recovery in the post-COVID-19 era. Clim
Change Econ 13(03):2240010
Isiksal AZ, Samour A, Resatoglu NG (2019) Testing the impact of real interest rate, income, and
energy consumption on Turkey’s CO2 emissions. Environ Sci Pollut Res 26(20):20219–20231.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-019-04987-5
Jiang Q, Khattak SI, Ahmad M, Lin P (2021) Mitigation pathways to sustainable production
and consumption: examining the impact of commercial policy on carbon dioxide emissions
in Australia. Sustain Prod Consum 25:390–403. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2020.11.016
Liguo X, Ahmad M, Khattak SI (2022) Impact of innovation in marine energy generation, distri-
bution, or transmission-related technologies on carbon dioxide emissions in the United States.
Renew Sustain Energy Rev 159:112225
Mahmood H, Adow AH, Abbas M, Iqbal A, Murshed M, Furqan M (2022) The ﬁscal and monetary
policies and environment in GCC countries: analysis of territory and consumption-based CO2
emissions. Sustainability 14(3):1225. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14031225
Mughal N, Kashif M, Arif A, Guerrero JWG, Nabua WC, Niedbała G (2021) Dynamic effects
of ﬁscal and monetary policy instruments on environmental pollution in ASEAN. Environ Sci
Pollut Res 28:65116–65126. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-021-15114-8
Muhaﬁdin D (2020) The role of ﬁscal policy and monetary policy in environmental degradation in
Indonesia. Int J Energy Econ Policy. https://doi.org/10.32479/ijeep.9586
Nguyen TP, Tran TN, Dinh TTH, Hoang TM, Duong Thi Thuy T (2022) Drivers of climate change
in selected emerging countries: the ecological effects of monetary restrictions and expansions.
Cogent Econ Financ 10(1):2114658. https://doi.org/10.1080/23322039.2022.2114658
162
N. Omar and D. Yousri
Noureen S, Iqbal J, Chishti MZ (2022) Exploring the dynamic effects of shocks in monetary and
ﬁscal policies on the environment of developing economies: evidence from the CS-ARDL
approach. Environ Sci Pollut Res 29(30):45665–45682. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-022-
19095-0
Omar N, Richter C (2021) Monetary policy and the top 10%: a time-series analysis using ARDL
and ECM. Stat Politics Policy 12(2):359–374. https://doi.org/10.1515/spp-2021-0019
Palmatier RW, Houston MB, Hulland J (2018) Review articles: purpose, process, and structure. J
Acad Mark Sci 46:1–5. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747-017-0563-4
Pérez-Moreno S, Martín-Fuentes N, Albert JF (2022) Rethinking monetary policy in the framework
of inclusive and sustainable growth. Econ Policies Sustain Resilience 319–364
Pradeep S (2022) Role of monetary policy on CO2 emissions in India. SN Bus Econ 2(1):3. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s43546-021-00175-1
Qingquan J, Khattak SI, Ahmad M, Ping L (2020) A new approach to environmental sustainability:
assessing the impact of monetary policy on CO2 emissions in Asian economies. Sustain Dev
28(5):1331–1346. https://doi.org/10.1002/sd.2087
Shobande OA (2022) Is climate change a monetary phenomenon? evidence from time series
analysis. Int J Sust Dev World 29(2):99–111. https://doi.org/10.1080/13504509.2021.1920064
Snyder H (2019) Literature review as a research methodology: an overview and guidelines. J Bus
Res 104:333–339. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2019.07.039
Taha SM, Yousri D, Richter C (2022) A discovery of the true relationship between biodiversity and
economic growth in light of COVID-19. Clim Change Environ Sustain 173–184. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-031-12015-2_17
Tranﬁeld D, Denyer D, Smart P (2003) Towards a methodology for developing evidence-informed
management knowledge by means of systematic review. Br J Manag 14(3):207–222. https://doi.
org/10.1111/1467-8551.00375
Ullah S, Ozturk I, Sohail S (2021) The asymmetric effects of ﬁscal and monetary policy instruments
on Pakistan’s environmental pollution. Environ Sci Pollut Res 28:7450–7461. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11356-020-11093-4
Wang Q, Yang T, Li R (2023) Does income inequality reshape the environmental Kuznets curve
(EKC) hypothesis? a nonlinear panel data analysis. Environ Res 216:114575. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.envres.2022.114575
Xin L, Ahmad M, Murshed M (2022) Toward next-generation green solar cells and environ-
mental sustainability: impact of innovation in photovoltaic energy generation, distribution, or
transmission-related technologies on environmental sustainability in the United States. Environ
Sci Pollut Res 29(59):89662–89680. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-022-21953-w
Zeraibi A, Ahmed Z, Shehzad K, Murshed M, Nathaniel SP, Mahmood H (2022) Revisiting the EKC
hypothesis by assessing the complementarities between ﬁscal, monetary, and environmental
development policies in China. Environ Sci Pollut Res 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-
021-17288-7
Zhang D, Wang Y, Peng X (2023) Carbon emissions and clean energy investment: global evidence.
Emerg Mark Financ Trade 59(2):312–323. https://doi.org/10.1080/1540496X.2022.2099270
The Role of Islamic Values on Sustainable
Lifestyles: Does Living Area Matter?
Mohamad Saifudin Mohamad Saleh, Ali Mehellou, and Bahiyah Omar
Abstract Relevant research has highlighted the signiﬁcance of religious values in
promoting sustainable lifestyles. Living areas, which are frequently distinguished
by technological, social, and economic variances, potentially inﬂuence people’s
lifestyles. This study aimed to examine the impact of living areas on the correla-
tion between the (i) ﬁve Islamic values (preserving religion, life, intellect, progeny,
and wealth) drawn from (Maqasid) Shariah goals and (ii) sustainable lifestyles. As a
Muslim-majority country with a large disparity between urban and rural conditions,
Malaysia was chosen as the study location. Survey data were collected from 682
Malaysian citizens and subsequently analysed via Partial Least Squares-Structural
Equation Modelling (PLS-SEM). Resultantly, the moderating effect of living area
was unsupported. The correlations between the ﬁve Shariah goals and sustainable
lifestyles proved unaffected by people’s urban or rural living areas. In this vein,
sustainable lifestyles were signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by the Islamic values practised in
communities, regardless of their living area. The interview outcomes also rendered
social media exposure and the universal understanding of sustainable lifestyles and
Maqasid Shariah made the living area as not signiﬁcant to inﬂuence people’s under-
standing of both elements. This research could facilitate national policymakers to
increase public awareness of sustainable lifestyles in the Islamic framework without
needing to distinguish between rural and urban communities.
Keywords Sustainable lifestyles · Religion · Values · Survey · Sustainable
development
1
Introduction
As one of the emerging economies in Southeast Asia, Malaysia is located close
to Singapore, Thailand, and Indonesia. The country is committed to attaining the
2030 Agenda, such as (i) developing green technology to strike a balance between
M. S. Mohamad Saleh (B) · A. Mehellou · B. Omar
School of Communication, Universiti Sains Malaysia, 11800 Minden, Penang, Malaysia
e-mail: saifudinsaleh@usm.my
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_10
163
164
M. S. Mohamad Saleh et al.
economic and environmental protection and (ii) alleviating climate change issues
(Isa et al. 2021). Unsurprisingly, Malaysia is known for its sustainable development
efforts to mitigate poverty, elevate people’s quality of life, offer high-quality educa-
tion, and improve environmental quality since the 1970s (Beton Kalmaz and Awosusi
2022). Malaysia ranked 60 out of 166 countries worldwide under the SDG global
rank (Sachs et al. 2020) and has achieved SDG1 (no poverty), 95% of SDG 7 (afford-
able and clean energy), and 94% of SDG 11 (sustainable cities and communities)
(Sachs et al. 2020).
Despite efforts to catalyse and attain sustainable development, Malaysia remains
susceptible to environmental degradation. For example, the country is in the prelimi-
nary stages of renewable energy (Rahman et al. 2022), which renders it vulnerable to
climate change and adverse environmental effects (Patwary et al. 2022). The incon-
gruency between rural and urban settings, speciﬁcally in terms of facilities, technolo-
gies and social economic issues (poverty), is another national conundrum. Poverty in
rural areas has garnered much attention from the Malaysian government via policy
implementation (Tedong et al. 2022). Rural settlements in Malaysia encompass a
population of under 10,000, with most of the residents employed in the agricul-
tural sector as their primary source of income (Hanapiah et al. 2022). Based on the
Economic Planning Unit of Malaysia, relevant government bodies strive to accelerate
regional- and state-level developments and bridge the rural–urban development gap
for higher inclusion (Economic Planning Unit 2021).
As a country with a Muslim-majority (63.5%) population known (Department
of Statistics Malaysia 2022), Malaysia has often been selected as the study context
to examine Maqasid Shariah and its association with environmental and sustain-
ability issues. The Maqasid Shariah (the objectives of Islamic law) underscores the
well-being of humanity (Al-Nahari et al. 2022). Five key goals, such as preserving
religion, life, intellect, progeny, and wealth constitute Maqasid Shariah. Notably, the
ultimate goal of well-being is attained by considering the ﬁve aforementioned goals,
which could motivate and guide human beings to behave appropriately and live a
better life (Al-Nahari et al. 2022). Nurul Aida (2015) examined the integration of
sustainability notions with current urban sustainability practices in Malaysia from an
Islamic perspective, while (Md Dali et al. 2016) used the Maqasid Shariah framework
to explore the liveability planning for Malaysian cities. Likewise, Dali et al. (2018)
aimed to structure an evaluation model by identifying and ranking Maqasid Shariah
indicators and sub-indicators based on liveability and quality of life in Malaysian
cities. Yaakub and Abdullah (2020) investigated and discussed a port’s strategies to
be environmentally sustainable following the Maqasid Shariah tenets.
Notwithstanding, research on Maqasid Shariah with regards to sustainable
lifestyles in Malaysia remains scarce. The essentiality of such studies stems from the
role of human behaviour in sustainable development and environmental degradation.
Previous works such as Hiratsuka et al. (2018), Jackson and Smith (2018) under-
scored unsustainable human behaviours as the key determinants of environmental
degradation, climate change, health deterioration, and economic issues. Western
academia has conducted summits and performed research and projects on sustainable
The Role of Islamic Values on Sustainable Lifestyles: Does Living Area …
165
lifestyles, such as The SPREAD Sustainable Lifestyles 2050, to support Europeans’
adoption of sustainable lifestyles (Backhaus et al. 2012).
The current work differed from other studies following its examination of sustain-
able lifestyles from an Islamic perspective and values. This study aimed to determine
whether the (urban versus rural) living areas affect people’s internalisation of the
Maqasid Shariah-sustainable lifestyle relationship.
2
Maqasid Shariah as a Framework for Sustainable
Lifestyles in Malaysia
The Maqasid Shariah framework (see Fig. 1) is extensively utilised in economy,
ﬁnance, accounting, and banking-related domains (Tubarad et al. 2022). Saifud-
deen et al. (2014) aimed to establish a complementary model of bioethics following
Maqasid Shariah to address bioethical concerns, while (Md Dali et al. 2016)
employed this framework for urban liveability planning. Perceivably, such a frame-
work would render cities more liveable in the future. Shompa and Mohadis’s
(2022) proposed a conceptual integrated persuasive behavioural changed framework
following Maqasid Shariah aiming to promote green practices in municipal solid
waste disposal among Malaysians.
The aforementioned framework has garnered much attention from Muslim
scholars and practitioners in different domains, speciﬁcally those in Malaysia (Azis
et al. 2020). Parallel to Azis et al. (2020), approximately 80% of the listed companies
in Malaysia are Shariah-compliant. Regardless, the integration of Maqasid Shariah
with environmental and sustainability research and practices remains inadequate,
particularly in corporate studies (Nizam and Larbani 2016).
Fig. 1 The elements of Maqasid Shariah framework
166
M. S. Mohamad Saleh et al.
3
Urbanisation and Sustainable Lifestyles in Malaysia
Although the urbanisation rate in Malaysia reached 77.2% in 2020 based on the last
census statistics (Economic Planning Unit 2021), the local population’s urbanisation
process and unsustainable lifestyles instigate environmental, social, or economic
issues involving air pollution, water pollution, noise and congestion, and waste
disposal (Md Dali et al. 2016; Murad and Pereira 2019). These challenges led the
Federal Town and Country Planning Department (FTCPD) to develop the Malaysian
Urban Rural Indicators Network (MURNInet) to ascertain the sustainability level
(Dali et al. 2017).
The Economic Planning Unit recently highlighted the gap between urban and
rural areas in Malaysia as one of the issues underlying the development processes
of infrastructure, telecommunications, transportation, and quality of life (Economic
Planning Unit 2021). As such, many local studies (Denan et al. 2015; Pathman et al.
2018; Rani et al. 2019; Sulaiman et al. 2018; Thompson 2020; Vethanayagam James
and How 2017) have examined the effect of (urban or rural) living areas on people’s
knowledge, values, feelings, attitudes, lifestyles, practices, and behaviours.
Numerous studies and reports on the environment and sustainability have consid-
ered the distinct characteristics between urban and rural settings and inhabitants
based on social, environmental, and economic factors, such as perceptions of envi-
ronmental change or development. As reported by Rasoolimanesh et al. (2017), urban
areas and their residents were the intended beneﬁciaries of most urban facilities, such
as roads, infrastructure, public transportation, and services. Hiratsuka et al. (2018)
also claimed that the public transportation network is more developed in urban areas
than their rural counterparts. Such disparity can affect people’s use of public trans-
portation. Additionally, environmental and health issues could impact their choices
andpreferences.YangandHuang(2018)underscoredthevariancebetweenurbanand
rural areas and the reﬂection of residency status on individual behaviour. Likewise,
the level of awareness related to climate change differed among rural and urban
residents (Nash et al. 2019). Nevertheless, the urban–rural differences depend on
the research nature, objectives, context, and method. Jeinie et al. (2021) revealed no
difference in nutrition knowledge between urban and rural secondary school students
in Malaysia. Contrarily, Shah et al. (2020) identiﬁed differences in the level of stress
and eating behaviour of Malaysian secondary school adolescents living in rural and
urban areas. The aforementioned discussions led to the development of the study
hypotheses and theoretical framework (Fig. 2).
4
Hypotheses
H1: There is a signiﬁcant difference in the effect of preserving religion on sustainable
lifestyles among individuals living in rural and urban areas in Malaysia.
The Role of Islamic Values on Sustainable Lifestyles: Does Living Area …
167
Sustainable 
Lifestyles
Preserving 
Religion
Preserving 
Life
Preserving 
Intellect
Preserving 
Progeny 
Preserving 
Wealth
H1 
H2
H3
H5
H4 
Living Area
(urban vs rural)
Fig. 2 Theoretical framework of the study
H2: There is a signiﬁcant difference in the effect of preserving life on sustainable
lifestyles among individuals living in rural and urban areas in Malaysia.
H3: There is a signiﬁcant difference in the effect of preserving intellect on sustainable
lifestyles among individuals living in rural and urban areas in Malaysia.
H4: There is a signiﬁcant difference in the effect of preserving progeny on sustainable
lifestyles among individuals living in rural and urban areas in Malaysia.
H5: There is a signiﬁcant difference in the effect of preserving wealth on sustainable
lifestyles among individuals living in rural and urban areas in Malaysia.
5
Methodology
This study used a mixed method approach involving survey data (see Annex 1) to
test the study hypotheses and in-depth interview to derive some meaningful insights
from the ﬁndings. This sequential mixed method design would help to explore the
quantitative data in great detail.
In the ﬁrst phase, a survey was performed on six Malaysian states involving
Malaysian citizens from rural (30%) and urban (about 70%) areas. Following the
urbanisation stratum in Malaysia, two states were selected to represent each stratum.
For example, (i) Selangor and Penang, (ii) Johor and Terengganu, and (iii) Sarawak
and Kelantan represented high, medium, and low urbanisation rates, respectively.
Approximately 78% of the respondents have lived in their places for over ﬁve years.
Questionnaire items involving the dependent and independent variables were adapted
168
M. S. Mohamad Saleh et al.
from past literature (Ahamad and Arifﬁn 2018; Yusof et al. 2019). The survey items
were expert-reviewed, translated into the Malay language, and back-translated to
conﬁrm the accuracy of meaning pre-distribution. Subsequently, the questionnaire
was pilot-tested with 50 respondents. As the respondents could easily comprehend
the survey items, the test outcomes denoted high levels of reliability and validity. A
total of 682 valid questionnaires were collected between October 2021 and July 2022
during the actual survey. The collected data was later analysed using PLS-SEM.
Following Table 1, 55.4% of the respondents were women, while the remaining
44.6% were men. In terms of marital status, 56.0% of the respondents were single,
whereas 43.4% of them were married. With regards to age, 49% of the respondents
were from 21 to 30 years old. Religion-wise, 72.4% of the respondents were Muslims,
with 69.8% of them being Malay. Most of the respondents (59%) were college or
university graduates. In line with income, 28.6%, of the respondents earned below
RM2,000 annually.
In the second phase, an n-depth interview sessions were conducted with selected
respondents post-survey and outcome analysis to derive more information on the
reason underlying insigniﬁcant living areas on the Maqasid Shariah-sustainable
lifestyle relationship. Fundamentally, six interviewees from each group of the three
sub-groups (key Islamic ﬁgures, environmentalists, and survey respondents) (18
respondents) were interviewed until attaining data saturation. Six of the 18 respon-
dents were female, while the remaining 12 were male. The interviewees’ age ranged
between 25 and 56 years old. Furthermore, the interviewees hailed from ethnically
and religiously diverse backgrounds: Malay Muslims (N = 14), Hindus (N = 3),
and Chinese Christians (N = 1). Most of the interviewees (N = 7) held a Bachelor’s
degree in multiple disciplines, such as communication, human development, Islamic
studies, production, and animal health. Several other occupations (mufti and deputy
mufti, director, president, and ofﬁcer) were represented among the interviewees.
Notably, the interviewees were assigned identiﬁcation codes (ID 1, ID 2, and so on)
to protect their privacy. The interview ﬁndings were thematically analysed and coded
via the MAXQDA programme. Moreover, Braun and Clarke’s (2006) thematic anal-
ysis framework served as a guideline to initiate the codes and themes and analyse
the interview outcomes. Notably, the Human Research Ethics Committee of USM
(USM/JEPeM/21040327) approved the ethical aspect of this study, including the
survey and interview.
6
Survey Results
Using PLS-SEM, this study employed a three-stage approach involving the (i) assess-
ment of measurement models, (ii) assessment of structural models, and (iii) multi-
group analysis (MGA) to assess both (urban and rural) models and compare the
estimated path coefﬁcient outcomes via PLS-SEM.
The Role of Islamic Values on Sustainable Lifestyles: Does Living Area …
169
Table 1 Respondents’ demographic Proﬁle
Demographic items
Categories
Frequency
Percentage (%)
Gender
Male
304
44.6
Female
378
55.4
Marital status
Married
296
43.4
Unmarried
386
56.6
Age (years)
18–20
67
9.8
21–30
337
49.4
31–40
137
20.1
41–50
92
13.5
51–59
45
6.6
60 and above
4
0.6
Religion
No religion
6
0.9
Islam
494
72.4
Christianity
64
9.4
Buddhism
67
9.8
Hinduism
51
7.5
Ethnicity
Malay
476
69.8
Chinese
107
15.7
Indian
63
9.2
Iban
27
4.0
Bidayuh
8
1.2
Punan
1
0.1
Education
Primary school or below
9
1.3
Secondary school
208
30.5
University or college
403
59.1
Graduate school
62
9.1
Monthly income (RM)
No salary
161
23.6
Less than 2,000
197
28.9
2,001–2,498
99
14.5
2,499 -4,849
135
19.8
4,850–10,959
78
11.4
(continued)
170
M. S. Mohamad Saleh et al.
Table 1 (continued)
Demographic items
Categories
Frequency
Percentage (%)
10,960–15,039
6
0.9
More than 15,040
6
0.9
State of residence
Johor
117
17.2
Kelantan
111
16.3
Pulau Pinang
136
19.9
Selangor
110
16.1
Terengganu
106
15.5
Sarawak
102
15.0
Area of living
Rural
205
30.1
Urban
477
69.9
Staying period
One year or less
42
6.2
Three years
37
5.4
Four years
36
5.3
Two years
36
5.3
Five years and more
531
77.9
7
Assessment of Measurement Model
As presented in Table 2, the measurement model assessment results conﬁrmed the
models’ validity and reliability in urban and rural areas. Both the composite reliability
(CR) and average variance extracted (AVE) denoted acceptable values. Additionally,
CR demonstrated a higher level of reliability (0.8–0.9) for both models. The high
AVE for both models (0.50) implied that the construct explains 50% of the items’
variance (Hair et al. 2019). Furthermore, most of the outer loadings exceeded 0.7
(Avkiran and Ringle 2018).
In addition, the Heterotrait-Monotrait ratio (HTMT) and Fornell-Larcker criterion
for both models’ discriminant validity proved that the model constructs were distinct
from one another (see Tables 3 and 4). No value exceeded the threshold value of
0.90 for HTMT. Meanwhile, the Fornell-Larcker criterion was fulﬁlled, with all
the diagonal values of each construct higher than their corresponding correlation
coefﬁcients (Hair et al. 2019). Overall, discriminant validity was established.
The Role of Islamic Values on Sustainable Lifestyles: Does Living Area …
171
Table 2 Measurement model assessment results
Constructs and items
Loading
CR
AVE
Urban
Rural
Urban
Rural
Urban
Rural
Preserving religion
0.896
0.905
0.634
0.658
PR1
0.760
0.891
PR2
0.781
0.851
PR3
0.860
0.860
PR4
0.704
0.718
PR5
0.865
0.718
Preserving life
0.916
0.918
0.548
0.554
PL1
0.671
0.761
PL2
0.733
0.788
PL3
0.762
0.768
PL4
0.686
0.684
PL5
0.756
0.729
PL6
0.743
0.785
PL7
0.798
0.737
PL8
0.725
0.727
PL9
0.778
0.711
Preserving intellect
0.837
0.820
0.563
0.533
PI1
0.812
0.693
PI2
0.695
0.731
PI3
0.789
0.797
PI4
0.699
0.695
Preserving progeny
0.933
0.934
0.666
0.671
PP1
0.759
0.785
PP2
0.868
0.837
PP3
0.858
0.890
PP4
0.780
0.827
PP5
0.882
0.722
PP6
0.750
0.866
PP7
0.806
0.799
Preserving wealth
0.871
0.871
0.628
0.629
PW1
0.811
0.835
PW2
0.795
0.827
PW3
0.798
0.763
PW4
0.764
0.743
Sustainable lifestyles
0.876
0.879
0.504
0.509
SL1
0.743
0.736
(continued)
172
M. S. Mohamad Saleh et al.
Table 2 (continued)
Constructs and items
Loading
CR
AVE
Urban
Rural
Urban
Rural
Urban
Rural
SL2
0.728
0.732
SL3
0.720
0.724
SL4
0.670
0.709
SL5
0.706
0.706
SL6
0.692
0.719
SL7
0.706
0.665
Table 3 Discriminant validity (HTMT)
PI
PL
PP
PR
SL
PW
PI
PL
PP
PR
SL
PW
Urban
Rural
PI
PI
PL
0.657
PL
0.610
PP
0.372 0.576
PP
0.305 0.591
PR
0.222 0.302 0.376
PR
0.416 0.479 0.439
SL
0.618 0.401 0.261 0.192 0.178
SL
0.554 0.455 0.350 0.330
PW 0.614 0.555 0.364 0.303 0.305 0.458 PW 0.495 0.536 0.421 0.406 0.506
Table 4 Fornell-Larcker criterion
PI
PL
PP
PR
SL
PW
PI
PL
PP
PR
SL
PW
Urban
Rural
PI
0.751
PI
0.730
PL
0.536 0.740
PL
0.493 0.744
PP
0.304 0.513 0.816
PP
0.261 0.543 0.819
PR
0.228 0.285 0.259 0.796
PR
0.324 0.436 0.387 0.811
SL
0.499 0.376 0.248 0.192 0.710
SL
0.457 0.419 0.346 0.315 0.713
PW 0.487 0.503 0.325 0.303 0.400 0.792 PW 0.401 0.485 0.396 0.359 0.439 0.793
8
Assessment of the Structural Model and Hypothesis
Testing
Upon establishing the outer or measurement models, the inner structural model was
later accessed According to Avkiran and Ringle (2018), the structural model aims to
ﬁnd evidence that supports the theoretical model (the theorised exogenous construct-
endogenous construct relationships).
Hair et al. (2019) proposed examining collinearity before testing the structural
relationships to avoid bias in the regression results. Based on Table 5, the Variance
The Role of Islamic Values on Sustainable Lifestyles: Does Living Area …
173
Table 5 Inner VIF values
Constructs
VIF values
Preserving religion
1.335
Preserving life
1.915
Preserving intellect
1.406
Preserving progeny
1.517
Preserving wealth
1.444
Inﬂation Factor (VIF) values of all constructs were under 3 (Avkiran and Ringle
2018; Hair et al. 2019). Thus, collinearity was not a concern in this study.
9
Multigroup Analysis (MGA)
MGA was employed to assess whether living areas matter by treating vicinity
(urban and rural areas) as the moderator. According to Henseler et al. (2016), the
measurement invariance must be established prior to assessing the structural model
and performing MGA. The measurement invariance or equivalence afﬁrms that the
measurement models specify measures of the same attribute under different condi-
tions (Cheah et al. 2020; Henseler et al. 2016). As such, the measurement invariance
ofthecompositemodels(MICOM)procedureservedtoevaluatemeasurementinvari-
ance (Avkiran and Ringle 2018) in this study. This three-step procedure entails (i)
conﬁgural invariance assessment (Step 1); (ii) compositional invariance assessment
(Step 2); (iii) equal means and variances assessment (Step 3) (Cheah et al. 2020).
In this vein, MGA is viable if Steps 1 and 2 are established (partial measurement
invariance) (Cheah et al. 2020). Based on Table 6, both steps 1 and 2 except 3 were
established in this study, with the partial measurement invariance conﬁrmed, but not
the full measurment invariance, where the mean for the construct PR was not equal
(see Table 6). Therefore, in this case, the data of different groups cannot be pooled
(Henseler et al. 2016). Meaning that, the statistical power cannot be increased and
the result of the model of this study cannot be generalized (Henseler et al. 2016).
Table 7 demonstrates the structural model assessment and MGA outcomes for
rural and urban inhabitants in Malaysia. Two non-parametric tests (MGA and permu-
tation) were used to compare path coefﬁcients between both groups. Resultantly,
non-signiﬁcant differences were identiﬁed between all the path coefﬁcients and
relationships across both models.
Although the difference of path coefﬁcients between the two models could not be
established (see Table 7), this study found that the total variance explained by the ﬁve
Islamic values for rural area was slightly higher (R2: 0.318, 32% variance explained)
than the urban area (R2: 0.289, 29% of variance explained).The results suggest that
the effect of Islamic values on sustainable lifestyle was greater for those living in
rural area than urban area. Nevertheless, the difference is marginal and insigniﬁcant.
174
M. S. Mohamad Saleh et al.
Table 6 Results of invariance measurement testing using permutation
Constructs
Conﬁgural
invariance
(Same
Algorithms
for Both
Groups)
Compositional
invariance (Correlation
= 1)
Partial
measurement
invariance
established
Equal mean assessment
Equal variance assessment
C = 1
Conﬁdence
interval
Differences
Conﬁdence
interval
Equal
Differences
Conﬁdence
Interval
Equal
Full
measurement
invariance
established
PR
Yes
0.978
[0.933,1.000]
Yes
0.184
[−0.147,
0.135]
No
−0.124
[−0.347,
0.296]
Yes
No
PL
Yes
0.997
[0.992,1.000]
Yes
−0.045
[−0.144,
0.127]
Yes
−0.061
[−0.179,
0.165]
Yes
Yes
PI
Yes
0.992
[0.990,1.000]
Yes
−0.118
[−0.134,
0.125]
Yes
−0.121
[−0.246,
0.210]
Yes
Yes
PP
Yes
0.996
[0.993,1.000]
Yes
−0.043
[−0.131,
0.139]
Yes
0.069
[−0.277,
0.229]
Yes
Yes
PW
Yes
1.000
[0.988,1.000]
Yes
−0.056
[−0.137,
0.131]
Yes
0.047
[−0.238,
0.227]
Yes
Yes
SL
Yes
0.999
[0.995,1.000]
Yes
−0.034
[−0.125,
0.128]
Yes
0.031
[−0.204,
0.180]
Yes
Yes
The Role of Islamic Values on Sustainable Lifestyles: Does Living Area …
175
Table 7 Hypothesis testing results
Hypothesis
and
relationships
Path
coefﬁcient
Conﬁdence interval
(95%)
P-value difference
(One-tailed)
Rural
Urban
Rural
Urban
Path
coefﬁcient
difference
Henseler,
Ringle
and
Sarstedt’s
MGA
Permutation
test
Supported
H1a/PR →
SL
0.065
0.028
[−0.038,
0.156]
[−0.056,
0.087]
0.037
0.305
0.372
No/No
H2b/ PL →
SL
0.086
0.069
[−0.047,
0.227]
[−0.019,
0.156]
0.017
0.432
0.409
No/No
H3c/ PI →
SL
0.276
0.362
[0.153,
0.369]
[0.269,
0.440]
−0.086
0.150
0.145
No/No
H4d/ PP →
SL
0.116
0.041
[−0.006,
0.229]
[−0.028,
0.112]
0.075
0.182
0.176
No/No
H5e/ PW →
SL
0.218
0.167
[0.097,
0.334]
[0.082,
0.260]
0.050
0.286
0.266
No/No
10
Interview Results
Two themes on why (rural and urban) living setting does not signiﬁcantly inﬂuence
people’s understanding of Maqasid Shariah and sustainable lifestyles were derived
from the in-depth interviews.
11
Same Exposure from Social Media
Most of the interviewees deemed urban or rural areas insigniﬁcant due to people’s
ability to easily access information from social media. In other words, no infor-
mation gap exists between rural and urban communities in Malaysia. Some of the
interviewees explained as follows:
In Malaysia, I think, because information can now be found at your ﬁngertips, a lot of
information is spread on social media and everyone can access it. The second, going back
to the problem, these Malaysians often associate every problem, must refer to religion. So,
it doesn’t matter whether he is in the urban or rural area, for example we see in this city the
issue may be a social issue. This social issue happens because of not following religion. If
we go outside the city, we also face the same issues, such as cleanliness. (ID 4).
There is no difference… This Maqasid Shariah effect on sustainable lifestyles has no
difference for people living in the city and also in the countryside. Maybe for me… what
I think is that… the world at your ﬁngertips. I mean, if we look at it now, village or rural
society is the same as today’s city society. Even if we look at the case of dumping babies, it’s
the same level… the countryside is the same, the city is the same. No difference. In the past,
we might have said that this city… it’s worse socially, the social life in this city is worse, but
176
M. S. Mohamad Saleh et al.
now it is not. Now… not now. Why? Because now the world is at your ﬁngertips. All people
can do whatever they want. (ID 14).
12
Universal Understanding
Intriguingly, the effect of Maqasid Shariah (religion value) on sustainable lifestyles
is universally understood by both rural and urban inhabitants. Thus, the living setting
proved insigniﬁcant. Two interviewees shared as follows:
I think back to, because in terms of understanding religion… it has no difference between the
village and the city. The understanding of religion no longer depends on the city or village.
(ID 18).
In my opinion, there is no signiﬁcant difference between those who live in the city and
the countryside in question understand the Maqasid Shariah towards a sustainable lifestyle
due to their understanding and attitude in understanding Islamic law. (ID 15).
13
Discussion
This study aimed to uncover whether the effect of Islamic values on sustainable
lifestyle would be different for Malaysians who live in urban and rural areas. The
results show that living areas does not matter. The effects were almost the same across
the two groups. Following the moderation results, the R2 value of the rural model
was slightly higher than that of the urban model. All ﬁve Maqasid Shariah predictors
denoted a slightly larger effect on sustainable lifestyles in rural than urban areas.
Although the study’s MGA and permutation result (p-value) revealed no signiﬁcant
difference between Malaysian urban and rural inhabitants, the effect of Islamic values
on sustainable lifestyle was greater for rural area than urban area. Such output calls
for a closer attention. One possible reason is that people in rural area may have higher
level of religiosity than urban people. Because of their strong belief of the Maqasid
Shariah, Malaysians who live in rural areas tend to adopt sustainable lifestyle—
which values are interwoven with the teachings of Islam—better than those who live
in urban areas. This assumption, however, requires further validation. It is important
to note that the ﬁve proposed hypotheses were unsupported when the results were
compared according to living areas.
The results of this study were consistent with some comparative studies
which evaluated differences between rural and urban areas in Malaysia context.
Vethanayagam James and How (2017), for example, found no signiﬁcant differ-
ence in the level of attitude between urban and rural residents in the Klang Valley,
Malaysia. Likewise, Jeinie et al. (2021) reported no difference in nutritional knowl-
edge among urban and rural students in East Malaysia. Similarly, the effect was
almost equivalent between Malaysians who live in rural and urban areas; suggesting
no signiﬁcant moderating effect of living area in this study.
The Role of Islamic Values on Sustainable Lifestyles: Does Living Area …
177
Based on the qualitative interview results, most of the interviewees corresponded
to the quantitative survey outcomes. Rural or urban living areas did not signiﬁcantly
impact the Maqasid Shariah-sustainable lifestyle relationship. Observably, rural and
urban inhabitants were exposed to social media and the issues underlying Maqasid
Shariah and sustainable lifestyles, which they deemed to be relatively common.
The Malaysian government, speciﬁcally the Department of Islamic Development
Malaysia (JAKIM), should impart Maqasid Shariah values and their connection to
sustainable lifestyles without differentiating the campaigns and education or training
strategies between the rural and urban areas.
14
Conclusion
The novelty of this study lies in its implementation of MST to address sustain-
able lifestyle issues in Malaysia and the impact of urban or rural living areas as a
moderator between the ﬁve Shariah goals and sustainable lifestyles. Additionally,
this study expanded the current body of literature on sustainable lifestyle issues. The
empirical outcomes derived from this study could beneﬁt local academicians with
a sound understanding of Maqasid Shariah and its implications for environmental
and sustainability issues, particularly those entailing sustainable lifestyles. Further-
more, the Malaysian government could develop key strategies and plans that suitably
educate the Muslim-dominant population on sustainable lifestyles within the Islamic
framework.
This research compared two test results (MGA and permutation) based on the
p-value to report the corresponding outcomes between urban and rural groups. This
comparison may have limited the study. Thus, further research could consider results
from the other SmartPLS-oriented tests (bootstrapping results) to demonstrate the
signiﬁcant difference between path coefﬁcients among both groups.
Although the ﬁndings of previous research related to the inﬂuence of living area
such as urban and rural settings on individuals’ perceptions have demonstrated posi-
tive effects, this study found different results. The negative result of this study may
be attributed to the urbanization rate in Malaysia, where less areas are considered
rural. Additionally, the inﬂuence of living area could be affected by other control-
ling variables such as religion, gender, income, or level of education, among others.
Testing the living area, i.e., urban, and rural as a categorical moderator might yield
different statistical results. Considering the absence of testing control variables in this
study as a limitation, future studies could examine the inﬂuence of control variables
on both independent variables (i.e., Maqasid Shariah) and the dependent variable
(i.e., sustainable lifestyles). Moreover, as this study was conﬁned to the Malaysian
context, future research could explore other Muslim-majority countries (such as
Brunei, Indonesia, or the Middle East) for comparative purposes.
178
M. S. Mohamad Saleh et al.
Acknowledgements The authors thank the Ministry of Higher Education Malaysia for the funding
support of this research under the Fundamental Research Grant Scheme (FRGS) with Project Code
FRGS/1/2021/SSI03/USM/02/2.
The authors also would like to thank the collaborators – Maqasid Shariah Department, Depart-
mentofIslamicDevelopmentMalaysia(JAKIM)andSetiuWetlandEcotourismDiscoveryInitiative
(ECOSWED) for their support.
Annexe 1
Section 1: Demographic Section
1. Gender:
□Male
□Female
2. Marital status:
□Unmarried
□Married
3. Age:
□18~20
□21~30
□31 ~40
□41 ~50
□51~59
□60 and
above
4. Religion:
□Islam
□Buddhism
□Christianity
□Hinduism
□No
religion
□Other, please state_____________
5. Ethnicity:
□Malay
□Chinese
□Indian
□Other, please state_______
_____
6. Educational level:
□Primary school
□Secondary School
□University
or college
□Graduate School
7. Monthly income (RM):
□No Income
□less than 2,000
□2001~
2498
□2,499~4,849
□4,850~10,959
□10,960~15,039
□More than
15,040
8. In which state do you live?
□Johor
□Kelantan
□Pulau Pinang
□Selangor
□Terengganu □Sarawak
9. What type of area do you live in?
□Urban
□Rural
10. How long have you been staying where you are now?
□One year or less
□2 years
□3 years
□4 years
□5 years and more
Section 2: About Life Objectives
The statements below are related to some aspects of your life. Think in terms of your
everyday experiences and please tick the most appropriate response.
Preserving Religion Items
1. Religion provides me guidance in my life.
2. Believing in God is essential for life.
3. I perform prayers regularly.
The Role of Islamic Values on Sustainable Lifestyles: Does Living Area …
179
4. I believe in the Divine will and decree.
5. I allocate enough time to learn about religion.
Preserving Life Items
1. I get enough food.
2. I have adequate clothing.
3. I live in comfortable house.
4. I am living a moral life.
5. I have good relations with family and relatives.
6. I live in peaceful neighbourhood.
7. I am adopting a healthy lifestyle.
8. I have access to health facilities.
9. I have good relations with neighbours.
Preserving Intellect Items
1. I can operate a computer.
2. I allocate enough time for reading.
3. I had adequate nutrition during the growing age.
4. I attend programs/courses to improve knowledge.
Preserving Progeny Items
1. Offspring should be provided with basic education.
2. Offspring should be provided with moral education.
3. Offspring should be protected from involvement in juvenile delinquencies.
4. Children should have the necessary immunization.
5. Children’s behaviour and activities should be monitored.
6. It is my responsibility to ensure a healthy environment.
7. Children should enjoy basic human rights.
Preserving Wealth Items
1. I can manage my own and family ﬁnances.
2. I save part of my earnings
3. I have stable income.
4. I have sufﬁcient income.
180
M. S. Mohamad Saleh et al.
Section 3: About Lifestyle
The following are statements about your lifestyle on a daily basis which is represented
by your behaviour. Please tick the most appropriate response that most represent your
degree of actual behaviour.
1. I opt for energy efﬁcient appliances (e.g., choosing appliances with energy
efﬁcient rating (EER) labels).
2. I attend seminars, workshops, conferences or exhibitions concerning the envi-
ronment.
3. I purchase products that can be recycled.
4. I participate in environmental activities organized by institutions or organizations
(e.g., tree planting activity, beach clean ups).
5. I practice recycling in my household.
6. I make decisions more consciously in effort to avoid over consumption.
7. I advise others (i.e., family, friends) to reduce consumption of resources (e.g.,
water, electricity).
References
Al-Nahari AAAQ, Monawer ATM, Haji Abdullah LB, Ali AKB, Abdul Rahman NNB, Achour
M (2022) Common conceptual ﬂaws in realizing vis-à-vis Islamic ﬁnance. ISRA Int J Islamic
Financ 14(2):190–205. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJIF-12-2020-0259
AvkiranN,RingleC(2018)Partialleastsquaresstructuralequationmodeling.SpringerInternational
Publishing AG, Switzerland
Azis N, Madah Marzuki M, Nik Abdul Majid WZ (2020) Fraud prevention in Malaysia: Maqasid
Aal-Shariah perspective. Global Bus Manag Res Int J 12:104–116
Backhaus J, Breukers S, Mont O, Paukovic M, Mourik R (2012) Sustainable lifestyles: today’s facts
and tomorrow’s trends. D1.1 Sustainable lifestyles baseline report
Cheah JH, Thurasamy R, Memon MA, Chuah F, Ting H (2020) Multigroup analysis using
SmartPLS: step-by-step guidelines for business research. Asian J Bus Res 10(3):I–XIX
Choi S, Feinberg RA (2018) The LOHAS lifestyle and marketplace behavior. In: Marques J (ed)
Handbook of engaged sustainability, pp 1069–1086. Springer International Publishing. https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-71312-0_10
Dali N, Abdullah A, Islam R (2018) Prioritization of the indicators and sub-indicators of Maqasid
Al-Shariah in measuring liveability of cities. Int J Anal Hierarchy Process 10(3):348–371
Dali NM, Sarkawi AA, Abdullah A (2017). An analytical study of Malaysia’s quality of life
indicators. J Bus Econ 8(6):488–498. https://doi.org/10.15341/jbe(2155-7950)/06.08.2017/004
Denan Z, Othman AA, Razlan RR (2015) Quality of life in rural and urban areas in the state of
Selangor, Malaysia. In: Paper presented at 25th international business information management
association conference—innovation vision 2020: from regional development sustainability to
global economic growth. IBIMA
Department of Statistics Malaysia (2022) Infographics. Accessed from www.mycensus.gov.my.
Economic Planning Unit (2016) The National Scp Blueprint 2016–2030. The Pathways for Sustain-
able Consumption and Production (SCP) in Malaysia. Accessed from https://www.oneplanetnet
work.org/sites/default/ﬁles/malaysia_the_national_scp_blueprint_2016_-_2030.pdf
The Role of Islamic Values on Sustainable Lifestyles: Does Living Area …
181
Economic Planning Unit (2021) Twelfth Malaysia Plan 2021–2025. A Prosperous, Inclusive,
Sustainable Malaysia. Accessed from https://rmke12.epu.gov.my/en
Hair JF, Risher JJ, Sarstedt M, Ringle CM (2019) When to use and how to report the results of
PLS-SEM. Eur Bus Rev 31(1):2–24. https://doi.org/10.1108/EBR-11-2018-0203
Hanapiah TM, Samsudin NA, Farid M (2022) Impacts of integrated rural development towards
traditional village economy in Ketengah, Terengganu, Malaysia. Plann Malaysia: J Malays Inst
Plann 20(4):210–221. https://doi.org/10.21837/pm.v20i23.1162
Henseler J, Ringle CM, Sarstedt M (2016) Testing measurement invariance of composites using
partial least squares. Int Mark Rev
Hiratsuka J, Perlaviciute G, Steg L (2018) Testing VBN theory in Japan: relationships between
values, beliefs, norms, and acceptability and expected effects of a car pricing policy. Transp Res
F: Trafﬁc Psychol Behav 53:74–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2017.12.015
Isa NM, Sivapathy A, Adjrina Kamarruddin NN (2021) Malaysia on the way to sustainable devel-
opment: Circular economy and green technologies. In: Sergi BS, Jaaffar AR (eds) Modeling
economic growth in contemporary Malaysia (Entrepreneurship and global economic growth).
Emerald Publishing Limited. https://doi.org/10.1108/9781800438064
Jackson T, Smith C (2018).Towards sustainable lifestyles. In: Lewis A (ed) The Cambridge hand-
book of psychology and economic behaviour, 2nd edn. Cambridge University Press. https://doi.
org/10.1017/9781316676349.017
Jeinie MHB, Guad RM, Hetherington MM, Gan SH, Aung YN, Seng WY, Lin CLS et al (2021)
Comparison of nutritional knowledge, attitudes and practices between urban and rural secondary
school students: a cross-sectional study in Sabah, East Malaysia. Foods 10(9):2037. https://doi.
org/10.3390/foods10092037
Kalmaz DB, Awosusi AA (2022) Investigation of the driving factors of ecological footprint in
Malaysia. Environ Sci Pollut Res 29(14):1–14. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-022-19797-5
Md Dali N, Abdullah A, Sarkawi AA (2016) Liveability planning for cities: within the Islamic
framework of Maqasid Al-Shari’ah. Plann Malaysia 14(4):197–208. https://doi.org/10.21837/
pmjournal.v14.i4.158
Murad MW, Pereira JJ (2019) Malaysia: environmental health issues. In: Nriagu J (ed) Encyclopedia
of environmental health, 2nd edn. Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-409548-9.115
29-5
Nash N, Capstick S, Whitmarsh L, Chaudhary I, Manandhar R (2019) Perceptions of local envi-
ronmental issues and the relevance of climate change in Nepal’s Terai: perspectives from two
communities. Front Sociol 4(60):1–18. https://doi.org/10.3389/fsoc.2019.00060
Nizam I, Larbani M (2016) A structural equation model of Maqasid Al-Shari’Ah as a socioeconomic
policy tool. Policy Discuss Maqasid Al-Shari’ah Socioecon Dev Edn 1:151–184
Nurul Aida BS (2015) Urban sustainability in the context of Maqasid Al-Shariah: A study on
Malaysian Urban Indicators Network (MURNInet). Kulliyyah of Architecture and Environ-
mental Design, Internationai Islamic University Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur
Pathman A, Aziah BD, Zahiruddin WM, Mohd Nazri S, Sukeri S, Tengku Zetty TJ, Hamat RA,
Malina O, Norazlin I, Zawaha I et al (2018) Knowledge, attitudes, practices and health beliefs
toward Leptospirosis among urban and rural communities in Northeastern Malaysia. Int J
Environ Res Public Health 15(11):2425. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15112425
Patwary AK, Mohamed M, Rabiul MK, Mehmood W, Ashraf MU, Adamu AA (2022) Green
purchasing behaviour of international tourists in Malaysia using green marketing tools: theory
of planned behaviour perspective. Nankai Bus Rev Int 13(2):246–265. https://doi.org/10.1108/
NBRI-06-2021-0044
Rahman ARA, Shaari MS, Masnan F, Esquivias MA (2022) The impacts of energy use, tourism
and foreign workers on CO2 emissions in Malaysia. Sustainability 14:2461. https://doi.org/10.
3390/su14042461
Rani MDM, Ithnin M, Mohamad Nor NU, Juliana N, Effendy NM, Azmani S, Abang Abdullah
KH, Mohd Aris MS, Abu IF (2019) Comparison of health-seeking behaviour between urban and
182
M. S. Mohamad Saleh et al.
rural Malay population of Negeri Sembilan, Malaysia. Int J Res Pharm Sci 10(4):3608–3615.
https://doi.org/10.26452/ijrps.v10i4.1742
Rasoolimanesh SM, Ringle CM, Jaafar M, Ramayah T (2017) Urban vs. rural destinations: resi-
dents’ perceptions, community participation and support for tourism development. Tour Manag
60:147–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tourman.2016.11.019
Sachs J, Schmidt-Traub G, Kroll C, Lafortune G, Fuller G, Woelm F (2020) The
sustainable development goals and COVID-19. Sustainable Development Report 2020.
Accessed from https://s3.amazonaws.com/sustainabledevelopment.report/2020/2020_sustain
able_development_report.pdf
Saifuddeen SM, Rahman NNA, Isa NM, Baharuddin A (2014) Maqasid Al-Shariah as a comple-
mentary framework to conventional bioethics. Sci Eng Ethics 20(2):317–327. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11948-013-9457-0
Shah NM, Aghamohammadi N, Majid HA (2020) The different level of stress and eating behaviour
among secondary school adolescents in rural and urban area in Malaysia. ASM Sc J 13(Special
Issue 5):188–197
Shompa ZA, Mohadis HM (2022) A conceptual integrated persuasive behavioral change framework
based on Maqasid al-Shariah to encourage green practices of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW)
disposal. 7(1):1–17
Sulaiman Y, Nik Mat NK, Abd Ghani NH, Arif A (2018) Understanding consumption pattern of
rural and urban consumers in Malaysia. Int J Eng Technol (UAE) 7(4):238–246. https://doi.org/
10.14419/ijet.v7i4.28.22586
Tedong PA, Zyed ZAS, Jani R, Fazlie FA (2022) Rural residents’ perceptions on the poverty alle-
viation and governance in Sarawak, Malaysia. Int J Bus Soc 23(2):649–664. https://doi.org/10.
33736/ijbs.4831.2022
Thompson EC (2020) Urban annexation of the rural: Kebun culture in Malaysia. Singap J Trop
Geogr 41(1):136–153. https://doi.org/10.1111/sjtg.12301
Tubarad CPT, Mohamad M, Mohammed NF (2022) A decade of Maqasid Shariah research: a
bibliometric analysis. Manag Acc Rev 21(2):211–238
Vethanayagam James N, How V (2017) Urban and rural inequality in knowledge, attitude and
practice on haze pollution episode in Klang Valley, Malaysia. Malays J Public Health Med
157–162
Yaakub S, Abdullah NAHN (2020) Towards Maqasid Shariah in sustaining the environment through
impactful strategies. Int J 5(1):36–45
Yang Y, Huang S (2018) Religious beliefs and environmental behaviors in China. Religions 9(3):72.
https://doi.org/10.3390/rel9030072
Where’s Wally? The Search for Social
Sustainability in the Maritime Industry
and Recommendations for Future
Research
Michael Ekow Manuel and Alina Prylipko
Abstract Transport systems play a vital role in the pursuit of sustainable develop-
ment. Approximately 80% of the global merchandise trade is facilitated by shipping,
which is considered the foremost environmentally and economically efﬁcient mode
of transport per unit of cargo. Despite these advantages, shipping is responsible for
nearly 3% of greenhouse gas emissions, making it imperative to research operational,
technological, and market-based solutions for decarbonization. Unfortunately, these
endeavors frequently fail to integrate social aspects. This missing piece fundamen-
tally distorts the understanding of sustainability and risks introducing even more
shipping-related externalities. Drawing from the ﬁndings of a systematic review
of maritime literature between years 2015 to 2023, complemented by a thematic
synthesis, this paper interrogates academic research in the realm of social sustain-
ability within maritime transport. The study aims to offer insights for future research
on sustainable maritime transport and speciﬁcally its social dimension. The paper
urges academics to establish theoretical foundations for their studies that consider
contextual and sectoral variations and thereby to substantiate their choices. In addi-
tion, this paper suggests focusing future research endeavors on empirical data gath-
ering and deploying innovative research methods in the collection of such data.
Finally, this study identiﬁes speciﬁc social sustainability themes that could be further
elaborated and highlights the importance of considering procedural aspects of social
sustainability in policy formation and implementation.
Keywords Social sustainability · Maritime industry · Shipping · Research
M. E. Manuel · A. Prylipko (B)
World Maritime University, PO Box 500, 201 24 Malmö, Sweden
e-mail: w2005117@wmu.se
M. E. Manuel
e-mail: mem@wmu.se
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_11
183
184
M. E. Manuel and A. Prylipko
1
Introduction
The social dimension of sustainable development has proven to be particularly
challenging to research, especially in its operationalization, predominantly due to
ontological and epistemological debates surrounding the concept. Social sustain-
ability is value-laden (Spangenberg 2011) and continuously evolving (Colantonio
2009) across time and contexts (Boström 2012). As a result, the concept is strongly
inﬂuenced by the particular theoretical, methodological, normative, contextual, and
measurement approaches that one adopts (McGuinn 2020). Additionally, social
sustainability could be examined from various standpoints such as analytical, norma-
tive, substantive, and practical perspectives (Saunders et al. 2020). Despite academic
efforts to explain the multifaceted nature of social sustainability (Boström 2012;
Colantonio 2009; de Fine Licht and Folland 2019; Littig and Griessler 2005;
McGuinn 2020; Murphy 2012; Spangenberg 2011), the integration of this concept
intospeciﬁccontextsremainsproblematic(LealFilhoetal.2022).Theuniquecontext
of the maritime transportation system is no exception (Karakasnaki et al. 2023).
This is a challenge, given that transportation networks are critical in supporting
the achievement of sustainable development goals. Optimal sustainable transport
systems can facilitate economic growth, mitigate negative environmental impacts and
preserve natural resources, enhance access to essential goods and services, reduce
energy consumption, ensure resilience and effective disaster response, and enable
progress towards other sustainability goals (United Nations 2021).
Among all the modes of transportation, the maritime industry1 is particularly
signiﬁcant as it handles approximately 80% of global merchandised trade (UNCTAD
2023). By providing this essential transportation service, the maritime industry
contributes to addressing some of humanity’s most pressing sustainability chal-
lenges, including food and energy security and fostering prosperity of communi-
ties through trade facilitation (IMO n.d.). Nevertheless, like any other business,
shipping companies remain viable only when they generate revenue for their share-
holders. This primary economic focus and business-to-business nature of the industry
presents signiﬁcant challenges in accommodating competing environmental and
social interests (Parviainen et al. 2018).
Economies of scale allow shipping to be regarded as the most economically
and environmentally efﬁcient mode of transport per unit of cargo (Stopford 2009).
However, the industry’s reliance on an ageing ﬂeet that primarily runs on fossil fuels
(UNCTAD 2023) coupled with high volumes of goods transported over the years
have contributed to its substantial environmental impact. As an example, shipping
is currently responsible for nearly 3% of greenhouse gas emissions, representing
a 20% increase in emissions over the last decade (UNCTAD 2023). The growing
1 The maritime industry—also often referred to as international merchant shipping or shipping—
relates to the use of ships for international transportation of cargo and people and related activities
including legal, insurance, classiﬁcation, ﬁnance, education and other services (Hildebrand and
Schröder-Hinrichs 2014; Karagiannis et al. 2022).
Where’s Wally? The Search for Social Sustainability in the Maritime …
185
global attention to environmental sustainability and climate change in particular, is
putting the industry under considerable pressure to expedite its decarbonization.
As important as it is that the maritime industry continues to develop technical,
operational and market-based solutions to address pressing environmental challenges
“while sustaining economic growth” (UNCTAD 2023), it is becoming increasingly
critical to recognize the importance of social sustainability and to evaluate how these
aspects are considered in tandem with the economic and environmental dimensions
(Arslan et al. 2023). It has been highlighted that neglecting social sustainability
results not only in a lack of attention to critical social aspects, but it also funda-
mentally distorts the understanding of society-nature relationships and sustainable
development at large (Boström 2012). Similarly, Leal Filho et al. (2022, p. 2617)
stresses the importance of “the systems perspective in which social sustainability
impacts not only in terms of the social dimension but being also able to bring posi-
tive externalities to the other dimensions of sustainability, such as the economic and
environmental dimensions”. Therefore, for the maritime industry to progress towards
sustainability in its full paradigmatic scope, it should adopt a strategic and preven-
tive approach that integrates social considerations alongside its economic focus and
ongoing environmental efforts.
In a social context, shipping impacts the broader public in terms of its envi-
ronmental performance and the satisfaction of economic needs and rights (Kronfeld-
Goharani2018).Leastdevelopedcountries,smallislanddevelopingstatesandcertain
coastal communities are often dependent on the industry and are therefore the most
vulnerable during disruptions and transitions in shipping (UNCTAD 2023). The
sectoralsolargelyreliesonaninternationallaborforce,whichoftenmeansoperations
in a multicultural working environment. Although the industry employs nearly 1.9
millionseafarersandadditionalshorepersonnel,itstillstruggleswithrecruitmentand
retention and has to deal with a forecast shortage of suitably qualiﬁed seafarers and
other shore-based personnel (Drewry Maritime Research 2022; Nightingale 2023).
The industry also has signiﬁcant security, health and safety concerns, including chal-
lenges to physiological and mental health (Hayes-Mejia and Stafström2023), adverse
work/restarrangementsandfatigue(BaumlerandManuel2023;RajapakseandEmad
2023) and decreasing happiness overall (The Mission to Seafarers 2023). Further-
more, it is often characterized by higher salience of ﬁnancial stakeholders (Parvi-
ainen et al. 2018) and trade associations as compared to civil society organizations
(Baumler et al. 2021) and wider social partners (European Commission 2020).
However, social considerations are increasingly gaining attention in maritime
research. Reviewing the maritime literature between 1993 and 2017, Shin et al.
(2018) provide directions for sustainability research in shipping. Regarding social
sustainability, the authors recommend that future studies should dedicate equal atten-
tion to social aspects as given to the economic and environmental aspects of sustain-
able shipping and explore topics such as the “effectiveness of community plan-
ning, labor laws and regulations, and strategic policy-making”. Zhou et al. (2023)
also discuss a broader research agenda for sustainable shipping and highlight the
need to further investigate the link between the environmental and social pillars.
Their paper outlines risks related to social sustainability and offers suggestions
186
M. E. Manuel and A. Prylipko
for researching speciﬁc issues, including gender equality, the shortage of qualiﬁed
seafarers, seafarers’ wellbeing, and their physiological and psychological health.
Nevertheless, given the recent growing interest in social aspects in maritime research
(Arslan et al. 2023; Fasoulis 2023; Karakasnaki et al. 2023), it would be beneﬁcial to
review academic literature dedicated to social sustainability speciﬁcally and analyze
gaps in the relevant areas of research in detail.
This paper speciﬁcally focuses on social sustainability in the maritime industry
rather than the broader sustainable development discourse in shipping and is aimed
at offering detailed recommendations for future research, extending beyond research
questions to provide suggestions for theoretical foundations, data collection methods,
speciﬁcs of social sustainability discourse for various stakeholder groups, and related
thematic explorations.
2
Method
This section presents the systematic literature review methodology employed in the
study, covering the process of academic literature selection and screening. Addi-
tionally, it lists publications chosen for the full-text review and subsequent thematic
synthesis.
A systematic literature review methodology (Alexander 2020; Petticrew and
Roberts 2006; The Campbell Collaboration 2020) is employed. The work is also
informed by highly regarded procedures for quality appraisal and evidence synthesis
for qualitative studies developed by Dixon-Woods and colleagues (Dixon-Woods
et al. 2004, 2006, 2007). For the synthesis of ﬁndings this study uses thematic
synthesis (Barnett-Page and Thomas 2009), which was completed in three stages:
selective coding, generation of descriptive themes and generating analytical themes
as recommended by Bryman (2016).
Structure of Publications
To collect academic publications, this study used SCOPUS, EBSCO, and Google
Scholar and complemented the literature search with a snowballing technique (refer-
ring to “the search of the reference lists of initially identiﬁed research items [in this
case literature] for further potentially relevant items” (Hiebl 2021)). The search was
limited to studies published between 2015 (when the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development was adopted) and September 2023. However, a number of seminal pre-
2015 publications discovered through the snowballing approach was also included.
Keywords used for the search included ‘maritime’, ‘shipping’, ‘marine’ or ‘ocean’
and ‘social and sustainab*’, ‘corporate and responsibility’, ‘green’, and ‘human
resourc*’. All publications underwent a three-level screening process (title, abstract
and full text) to exclude papers that solely addressed economic and environmental
Where’s Wally? The Search for Social Sustainability in the Maritime …
187
pillars of sustainable development without references to social sustainability. Addi-
tionally, publications limited to speciﬁc contexts, such as those dedicated to a partic-
ular country or a case study, were excluded, due to the possibility of low external
validity.
After reviewing 6,889 titles matching the search criteria, 555 papers were selected
for the abstract review. In this stage, a further 389 papers were eliminated, resulting in
166 studies selected for full-text screening. Surprisingly, after reviewing the full texts,
only 22 publications were deemed suitable for thematic analysis as the rest of the
articles did not address social aspects in the text. An additional 32 publications were
added to the review using the snowballing techniques, resulting in 54 publications
selected for the ﬁnal analysis (Table 1).
3
Results
The selected publications are distributed across a wide range of academic journals,
extending beyond the maritime ﬁeld to transport and broader journals, and include
10 book chapters.
Theoretical Foundations and Methodological Choices
Corporate social responsibility and stakeholder theories were the most popular refer-
ence theories, appearing in 10 and 6 papers, respectively. Other theories applied
included resource-based theory (3 papers), resource dependence theory (2 papers),
governance theory, objectiﬁcation, organizational theory, poststructuralist discourse
theory, service-dominant logic, grounded theory, slack resource theory, and relational
view. Slightly more than half of the papers, 28 publications, did not have explicit
references to any theoretical foundation used for the study. Among the remaining
studies that included references to underpinning theories, not all substantiated their
choice or discussed the implications and limitations of the theories selected on the
research outcomes. This fact posed a signiﬁcant challenge to analyzing the literature
and assessing the relevance and impact of the theoretical foundations.
To illustrate the signiﬁcance of theoretical choices, consider exploring the limi-
tations of the most commonly used theory in this context—corporate social respon-
sibility. Corporate social responsibility and more recently corporate sustainability
are used as managerial techniques to incorporate social aspects into business oper-
ations (Fasoulis and Kurt 2019b). Publications that employ this theory approach
social sustainability from an organizational perspective, focusing on the micro-
and meso- levels of individual persons and ﬁrms. Consequently, depending on the
speciﬁc research objectives/questions, corporate social responsibility might not be
the most suitable theoretical foundation, particularly when the study investigates
social sustainability on a macro scale (Vejvar 2019). Furthermore, empirical evidence
suggests that the corporate shipping sector often prioritizes economic and environ-
mental considerations over social (Kunnaala et al. 2013). Considering that corporate
initiatives are voluntary actions, adopting a corporate perspective to the research has
188
M. E. Manuel and A. Prylipko
Table 1 Publications included in the systematic literature review of social sustainability in the
maritime industry
N
Author(s)
Year
Title
1
Agyabeng-Mensah et al.
2020
Green warehousing, logistics optimization,
social values and ethics and economic
performance: the role of supply chain
sustainability
2
Akkan
2019
CSR activities in maritime and shipping
industries
3
Andersson et al.
2016
Pre-study on sustainability indices for shipping
4
Arslan et al.
2023
A social sustainability model for maritime
labour force based on card sorting, fuzzy AHP
& QFD method
5
Ashraﬁet al.
2020
A review of corporate sustainability drivers in
maritime ports: a multi-stakeholder perspective
6
Bellefontaine et al.
2019
Maritime industry, multicultural human
environment and corporate social
responsibility: bridges burnt and lessons
learned
7
Benamara et al.
2019
Relevant issues at the interface of maritime
transport and the sustainability imperative
8
Bonilla-Priego et al.
2014
Corporate sustainability reporting index and
baseline data for the cruise industry
9
Cahoon et al.
2014
Human resource practices in seafaring:
Opportunities for improving retention
10
Dooms
2018
Stakeholder management for port
sustainability: moving from ad-hoc to structural
approaches
11
Fasoulis
2023
Advancing aspects of social sustainability
dimension in shipping: exploring the role of
corporate social responsibility in supporting the
Seafarer Human Sustainability Declaration
12
Fasoulis
2019
Reframing corporate social responsibility and
sustainability in the aftermath of United
Nations 2030 Agenda: An empirical study into
the tanker and dry bulk maritime sector
13
Fasoulis & Kurt
2018
Determinants to the implementation of
corporate social responsibility in the maritime
industry: a quantitative study
14
Fasoulis & Kurt
2019
Embracing sustainability in shipping: assessing
industry’s adaptations incited by the newly
introduced ‘triple bottom line’ approach to
sustainable maritime development
15
Froholdt
2018
The perception of corporate social
responsibility in the maritime industry
(continued)
Where’s Wally? The Search for Social Sustainability in the Maritime …
189
Table 1 (continued)
N
Author(s)
Year
Title
16
Graham
2009
Maritime security and seafarers’ welfare:
towards harmonization
17
Grewal
2019
The Growth of CSR and its acceptance in the
maritime industry
18
Hamad
2017
Corporate social responsibility (CSR) in the
shipping industry: a disturbing mechanism
between maritime security needs and seafarers’
welfare
19
Jones et al.
2017
The two market leaders in ocean cruising and
corporate sustainability
20
Jones et al.
2019
Sustainability and the world’s leading ocean
cruising companies
21
Jovic et al.
2020
Improving maritime transport sustainability
using blockchain-based information exchange
22
Karagiannis et al.
2022
Mapping the maritime CSR agenda: A
cross-sectoral materiality analysis of
sustainability reporting
23
Karakasnaki et al.
2023
Maritime social sustainability:
Conceptualization and scale development
24
Koundouri et al.
2017
A socio-economic framework for integrating
multi-use offshore platforms in sustainable blue
growth management: theory and applications
25
Kronfeld-Goharani
2018
Maritime economy: insights on corporate
visions and strategies towards sustainability
26
Kunnaala et al.
2013
Corporate social responsibility in and shipping
27
Lekakou et al.
2016
Corporate social responsibility in the shipping
industry
28
Lund-Thomsen et al.
2016
Corporate social responsibility in the
international shipping industry:
State-of-the-art, current challenges, and future
directions
29
Manuel
2018
Safety and risk management considerations for
CSR
30
Oikonomou et al.
2018
A ﬁnancial business case for corporate social
responsibility
31
Osobajo et al.
2021
Stakeholder engagement: a conceptual
framework and initial validation to foster
sustainability development in a maritime cluster
32
Ovais
2019
Blue ocean social responsibility strategy:
creating competitive advantage through human
resource policies
33
Pantouvakisa & Vlachos
2020
Talent and leadership effects on sustainable
performance in the maritime industry
(continued)
190
M. E. Manuel and A. Prylipko
Table 1 (continued)
N
Author(s)
Year
Title
34
Parviainen et al.
2018
How can stakeholders promote environmental
and social responsibility in the shipping
industry?
35
Progoulaki & Theotokas
2016
Managing culturally diverse maritime human
resources as a shipping company’s core
competency
36
Progoulaki & Roe
2011
Dealing with multicultural human resources in
a socially responsible manner: a focus on the
maritime industry
37
Pyc
2020
Maritime safety culture as a condition for
sustainable shipping
38
Sampson
2016
‘Seabirds matter more than us!’ Understanding
the complex exercise of CSR in the global
shipping industry
39
Sampson & Ellis
2015
Elusive corporate social responsibility (CSR) in
the global shipping industry: the example of
shipboard accommodation
40
Shin
2015
A study of the inﬂuence of sustainable
management activities on customer satisfaction
and long-term orientation in the shipping
industry
41
Shin et al.
2018
Analyzing sustainability literature in maritime
studies with text mining
42
Sislian et al.
2016
A literature review on port sustainability and
ocean’s carrier network problem
43
Skovgaard
2014
European Union’s policy on corporate social
responsibility and opportunities for the
maritime industry
44
Stein & Acciaro
2020
Value creation through corporate sustainability
in the port sector: A structured literature
analysis
45
Vejvar
2019
Essays on sustainability issues in transportation
management
46
Wang et al.
2020
How can the maritime industry meet
Sustainable Development Goals? An analysis
of sustainability reports from the social
entrepreneurship perspective
47
Wu
2020
Discerning sustainability approaches in
shipping
48
Xue and Lai
2023
Responsible shipping for sustainable
development: adoption and performance value
(continued)
Where’s Wally? The Search for Social Sustainability in the Maritime …
191
Table 1 (continued)
N
Author(s)
Year
Title
49
Yang and Mekrangsiman
2023
Corporate social responsibility as sustainability
management: international shipping ﬁrms and
ﬁnancial performance
50
Yliskylä-Peuralahti
2017
Ecological modernization and the multi-scaled
governance of sustainability in maritime
transport
51
Yuen et al.
2019
A taxonomy of resources for sustainable
shipping management: their interrelationships
and effects on business performance
52
Yuen et al.
2019
A contingency view of the effects of
sustainable shipping exploitation and
exploration on business performance
53
Yuen et al.
2020
The role of stakeholder participation and
sustainability integration in maritime transport:
a structure-conduct-performance analysis
54
Zhou et al.
2023
Sustainable shipping: a critical review for a
uniﬁed framework and future research agenda
the tendency to limit the breadth and depth of understanding social sustainability in
the maritime industry at a macro level. Additionally, if the methodology relies on
self-reported data, such as is common for corporate social responsibility or sustain-
ability reporting, this could introduce signiﬁcant limitations of reliability and validity.
Given these considerations, the choice of a theoretical foundation for a study should
be justiﬁed with respect to research objectives, contextual and sectoral considerations
and account for the associated limitations in the outcomes of the research.
The methods employed in selected studies were largely traditional, with most
papers providing literature reviews (34 papers), primarily narrative. Only 4 studies
utilized systematic reviews. For data collection, studies frequently used surveys/
questionnaires (14 papers) and content analysis (3 papers). Given the signiﬁcant
methodological difﬁculties in measuring social sustainability (Karakasnaki et al.
2023), future research could explore methodological suggestions provided within
the broader social research literature such as those explored by Fahy and Rau (2013)
and Franklin and Blyton (2011). While the choice of research methods and tools
would largely depend on the speciﬁc research goals and related data gaps, researchers
should consider empirical data collection with alternative methods such as in-depth
interviews, focus groups, expert surveys, longitudinal studies, social experiments,
participatory action research and network analysis.
Research Directions and Thematic Synthesis
The analysis of the selected maritime literature identiﬁed a range of research direc-
tions relating to social sustainability broadly. Some aspects of social sustainability
are discussed in the broader context of sustainable maritime development (Bena-
mara et al. 2019; Vejvar 2019; Wang et al. 2020; Wu et al. 2020). Notably, the
192
M. E. Manuel and A. Prylipko
largest number of publications exploring social aspects belong to the corporate social
responsibility discourse (for example, Fasoulis 2023; Fasoulis and Kurt 2019a; Kara-
giannis et al. 2022; Kunnaala et al. 2013; Lund-Thomsen et al. 2016; Sampson 2016;
Sampson and Ellis 2016). This trend could be attributed the business nature of the
shipping industry and the inherent alignment of corporate social responsibility with
social connotations. Furthermore, the corporate perspectives on social aspects in the
World Maritime University’s edited publication ‘Corporate Social Responsibility in
the Maritime Industry’ (Froholdt 2018; Grewal 2018; Manuel 2018) increased the
number of search results in this area. This publication also accounted for the relatively
high number of book chapters (10) reviewed.
The research literature also dedicates attention to port sustainability and social
aspects in port operations (Ashraﬁet al. 2020; Dooms 2019; Sislian et al. 2016;
Stein and Acciaro 2020). This focus may be due to a larger proportion of business-
to-customer relationships in this sector and the attention from local communities
(Karakasnakietal.2023).Acommondiscussionthreadinthisliteraturearea/streamis
the impact of sustainable practices on stakeholder relationships and opportunities for
improvements in port performance. Studies have also explored the relation between
sustainability and the business performance of maritime transportation ﬁrms and
shipping companies (Yuen et al. 2019a, b) and the role of stakeholders in this
process (Osobajo et al. 2021; Parviainen et al. 2018; Yuen et al. 2020). Addition-
ally, the maritime literature discusses approaches to measuring social sustainability
(Andersson et al. 2017; Bonilla-Priego et al. 2014).
Some publications offer a more focused inquiry dedicated to speciﬁc shipping
sectors, including the cruise industry (Bonilla-Priego et al. 2014; Hillier et al. 2017;
Jonesetal.2019)andoffshoreplatforms(Koundourietal.2017).Socialsustainability
aspects align well with a human resources perspective (Ovais 2019; Pantouvakis
and Vlachos 2020; Progoulaki and Roe 2011; Progoulaki and Theotokas 2016).
Additionally, social sustainability is alluded to from the perspective of various social
issues, such as retention of seafarers (Cahoon et al. 2014), seafarers’ welfare (Graham
2009), safety and risk management (Manuel 2018), and safety culture (Pyć 2020).
Recent literature has begun to focus more on social aspects pertaining to seafarers
(Arslanetal.2023;Fasoulis2023;Karakasnakietal.2023).Thisemphasiscouldhave
been prompted by the COVID-19 pandemic, which highlighted the essential role of
seafarers in the shipping industry. However, it is important to stress that this emphasis
tends to overlook other onboard and shore-based maritime professionals, including
port employees, governmental ofﬁcials, surveyors, and educators. In fact, while the
indispensable role of stakeholder engagement in social sustainability is a common
thread observed across publications, there is no comprehensive consideration of what
social sustainability means to a broader range of stakeholders such as maritime ﬁrms,
governmental agencies, local communities, customers, and suppliers. The descriptive
and analytical synthesis of social sustainability themes conﬁrmed the conclusion
presented by Zhou et al. (2023) regarding the imbalance in the discussion of various
aspects of social sustainability with employees’ health and safety being the most
frequently mentioned in literature (Fig. 1).
Where’s Wally? The Search for Social Sustainability in the Maritime …
193
Society
•Environmental rights
and needs
•Business ethics
•Stakeholder 
engagement
•Human rights
•Accountability and 
reporting
•Health and safety
•Regulatory compliance
•Transparency
•Anti-corruption
•Diversity and inclusion
•Economic needs and 
employment
•Social justice
•Philanthropy
•Literacy and awareness
•Culture
•Peace
•Research
Local communities
•Literacy and awareness
•Culture
•Stakeholder 
engagement
•Rights and needs
•Local recruitment and 
supply
•Health
Employees
•Labour (working and 
living) conditions
•Education, training,
career development
•Occupational health and 
safety
•Welfare and wellbeing
•Stakeholder 
engagement
•Security
• Social security
•Diversity, equity and 
inclusion
•Cultural awareness
•Human rights
•Human resource
management
Customers and 
suppliers
•Stakeholder 
engagement
•Regulatory compliance
•Health and safety
•Product and service
responsibility
Fig. 1 Thematic Synthesis of Social Sustainability Discourse in the Maritime Literature between
2015 and 20232
Interestingly, the reviewed publications did not differentiate between the social
sustainability goals to be achieved and the procedural mechanisms for identifying and
implementing these goals effectively as suggested by Boström et al. (2015). Based
on Boström et al.’s insightful analysis, it is incontrovertible that the achievement and
strengthening of the substantive goals of social sustainability require the effective and
equitable involvement of the relevant social stakeholders, which should be embedded
procedurally in the governance model.
Furthermore, it was sometimes unclear whether publications were addressing the
role of the shipping industry in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals more
broadly or focusing on the sustainability of the shipping industry itself. In future
research, these two perspectives could be distinguished more clearly.
Finally, the overall observation from analyzing the literature is that the under-
standing and description of social sustainability in the shipping industry remains
fragmented. The maritime literature does not provide a clear deﬁnition of the concept.
This is not very surprising as the discussion about deﬁning social sustainability in the
wider context is fraught with confusion (de Fine Licht and Folland 2019). Similarly,
despite some attempts to conceptualize “maritime social sustainability” (Karakas-
naki et al. 2023), a comprehensive conceptualization model for the maritime context
of social sustainability as such (encompassing micro, meso and macro levels) is
yet to be attained. In the discussions about social sustainability, the publications
reviewed made little reference to the broader body of social science research, despite
the existence of seminal work in this area (Boström 2012; Colantonio 2009; de Fine
2 Social sustainability themes are mentioned in this table according to the frequency of references
in the academic literature selected for the review.
194
M. E. Manuel and A. Prylipko
Licht and Folland 2019; Littig and Griessler 2005; McGuinn 2020; Murphy 2012;
Spangenberg 2011). These works indicate possibilities for further research within
this sector drawn from a more holistic and well-rounded understanding of social
sustainability and thereby the progression towards crafting a deﬁnition that allows
for broad-based empirical data collection and analysis in the maritime industry.
4
Recommendations for Future Research
Building on the existing maritime literature, the following recommendations offer
a roadmap for future research endeavors in the ﬁeld of social sustainability in the
shipping industry.
Recommendation 1. Academic research and initiatives focused on the technical,
operational, environmental and market-based dimensions of sustainable maritime
development should incorporate social sustainability as an intrinsic component of any
sustainability framework. To achieve this integration, interdisciplinary collaboration
is crucial, involving researchers with a foundation in social sciences.
Recommendation 2. Researchers should be meticulous in both selecting and justi-
fying the theoretical foundations they apply in their work. It is essential to provide a
clear rationale for the selection of the theory while acknowledging its limitations and
potential implications on the research outcomes. These considerations are crucial not
only for improving academic rigor but also for advancing a more profound under-
standing of the multifaceted construct of social sustainability within the maritime
industry.
Recommendation 3. In their research designs, researchers should explore innovative
methods for empirical data collection beyond the traditional approaches. This has
the potential to signiﬁcantly contribute to theoretical advancements and to foster an
improved understanding of social sustainability from diverse perspectives.
Recommendation 4. It is important to continue the ongoing efforts to conceptualize
social sustainability within the maritime industry. In future research, it is recom-
mended that researchers distinguish between the micro-level perspective of indi-
viduals (e.g., seafarers), the meso-level of corporate entities (e.g., shipping compa-
nies) and the macro-level societal perspective (e.g., international/national gover-
nance in States and in organizations such as the International Maritime Organiza-
tion). This means clearly delineating social aspects relevant to various stakeholders,
including society at large, local communities, maritime ﬁrms, regulators, the range of
employees, customers, and suppliers. In turn, this will allow for the expansion of the
scope of social sustainability research beyond seafarers to include a broader spectrum
of maritime employees and other relevant stakeholders. Additionally, researchers
should endeavor to provide a comprehensive deﬁnition of social sustainability for
the maritime industry that allows for operationalizing of the construct across all the
relevant levels to allow for reliable and valid empirical data collection and analysis.
Where’s Wally? The Search for Social Sustainability in the Maritime …
195
Recommendation 5. Subsequent studies should explore and analyze extant social
issues in the maritime industry within a framework that interrogates both substantive
social sustainability goals and the procedural mechanisms for achieving them, as
recommended by Boström et al. (2015). A heightened focus on the procedural aspects
of social sustainability has the potential to expedite the achievement of the substantive
goals of social sustainability.
Recommendation 6. It is recommended that the broad conceptualizations and
deﬁnitions alluded to in Recommendation 4 should be contextualized to speciﬁc
research settings across the diverse operational parts of the maritime industry. This
focused/targeted approach offers better opportunities to ﬁll social sustainability with
substance and develop mechanisms for measuring social sustainability.
Recommendation 7. To further advance the progress of social sustainability research
within the maritime industry, it is recommended that institutional support be provided
and opportunities created for research into this subject. This will help the maritime
community address the issue of sustainable development holistically and alleviate
the current imbalance that favors its economic or environmental dimensions.
5
Conclusion
This study aimed to interrogate academic research in the realm of social sustainability
within the maritime transport with the purpose of offering insights for future research
in this area. Based on the outcomes of the systematic review of maritime literature
between years 2015 and 2023, the paper concludes that the pursuit of sustainable
development seems to compel maritime researchers to align their inquiries with
the global sustainability discourse. In maritime literature, however, it appears that
academic publications rarely adopt a holistic approach to sustainability, one that inte-
grates social considerations into research discussions focused on technical, opera-
tional, environmental, and market-based sustainable solutions. Furthermore, research
dedicated speciﬁcally to social sustainability in the maritime industry remains limited
and fragmented.
The persistent challenge in incorporating social sustainability can be attributed
to the inherent epistemological and ontological complexities of this construct. This
challenge is further compounded by the technical nature of maritime affairs that
seems to reduce the emphasis on social considerations. Additionally, the business-
oriented nature of the industry contributes further to the prioritization of ﬁnancial
considerations over social ones.
To facilitate progress in this research ﬁeld and enable the shipping industry to
advance towards genuinely sustainable solutions, institutionalized efforts can support
interdisciplinary research conducted by diverse research teams, with an additional
focus on social sustainability. Future research efforts could bring together the pieces
of the social sustainability puzzle into a comprehensive analytical conceptualization
196
M. E. Manuel and A. Prylipko
model based on a sound deﬁnition that can be applied across various shipping sectors,
jurisdictions, and stakeholder groups.
This systematic literature review often felt like searching for elements of social
sustainability in a seek-and-ﬁnd book, similar to searching for “Wally” in Martin
Handford’s humorous puzzle book series (Handford 2007). Searching for Wally is a
challengingtaskasthelandscapesinwhichWallyis“lost”,bustlewithactivityandthe
character himself often blends into the vibrant setting. Similarly, searching for social
sustainability across a range of research topics posed a challenge of unifying various/
diverse perspectives. Furthermore, social sustainability is related to a vibrant setting
of discourses on the human element, human resources, safety and security, diversity,
stakeholder salience and engagement, maritime governance at different levels, and
sustainable development. It encompasses a broad range of speciﬁc social considera-
tions making it exceptionally challenging to identify coherent and concise positions.
Additionally,thefactthatenvironmentalandeconomicfactorsalsocarrysocialimpli-
cations creates more complications. These intricacies and interconnections make the
pursuit of social sustainability a challenging endeavor, with elements that are multi-
faceted, elusive, and overlapping. However, it is a challenge that must be faced head-
on and prioritized given the importance of sustainable development. Wally must be
found!
The work informing this paper uncovered some vital pieces of the social sustain-
ability puzzle, but the quest does not conclude here. With the proposed recommen-
dations, future research can offer a more comprehensive understanding of social
sustainability within the maritime context.
References
Alexander PA (2020) Methodological guidance paper: the art and science of quality systematic
reviews. Rev Educ Res 90(1):6–23
Andersson K, Fridell E, Lundh M, Pahlm H, Sköld S, Ytreberg E (2017) Pre-study on sustainability
indices for shipping
Arslan O, Kececi T, Solmaz MS, Usluer HB (2023) A social sustainability model for maritime
labour force based on card sorting, fuzzy ahp & qfd method. Res Transp Bus Manag 49:101018
AshraﬁM, Walker TR, Magnan GM, Adams M, Acciaro M (2020) A review of corporate
sustainability drivers in maritime ports: A multi-stakeholder perspective. Marit Policy Manag
47(8):1027–1044
Barnett-Page E, Thomas J (2009) Methods for the synthesis of qualitative research: a critical review.
BMC Med Res Methodol 9:59
Baumler R, Arce MC, Pazaver A (2021) Quantiﬁcation of inﬂuence and interest at imo in maritime
safety and human element matters. Mar Policy 133:104746
Baumler R, Manuel ME (2023) The development of the maritime rest/work hours regime: the
normalization of deviance. In: Mukherjee PK, Xu J, Mejia MQ (eds) Maritime law perspectives
old and new. Nova Science Publishers
Benamara H, Hoffmann J, Youssef F (2019) Maritime transport: the sustainability imperative.
In: Psaraftis HN (ed) Sustainable shipping: a cross-disciplinary view. Springer International
Publishing, Cham, pp 1–31
Where’s Wally? The Search for Social Sustainability in the Maritime …
197
Bonilla-Priego MJ, Font X, Pacheco-Olivares MdR (2014) Corporate sustainability reporting index
and baseline data for the cruise industry. Tour Manage 44:149–160
Boström M (2012) A missing pillar? challenges in theorizing and practicing social sustainability.
Sustain, Sci, Pract, Policy 8(1):3–14
Boström M, Vifell ÅC, Klintman M, Soneryd L, Hallström KT, Thedvall R (2015) Social sustain-
ability requires social sustainability: procedural prerequisites for reaching substantive goals. Nat
Cult 10(2):131
Bryman A (2016) Social research methods. Oxford University Press
Cahoon S, Caesar L, Fei J (2014) Human resource practices in seafaring: opportunities for improving
retention. In: Xu J (ed) Contemporary marine and maritime policy. Nova Science Publishers
Inc., New York, pp 85–104
Colantonio A (2009) Social sustainability: a review and critique of traditional versus emerging
themes and assessment methods. In: Paper presented at: SUE-Mot conference 2009: second
international conference on whole life urban sustainability and its assessment: conference
proceedings. Loughborough University, Loughborough
de Fine LK, Folland A (2019) Deﬁning “social sustainability”: towards a sustainable solution to
the conceptual confusion. Etikk I Praksis-Nord J Appl Ethics 13(2):21–39
Dixon-Woods M, Bonas S, Booth N, Jones D, Miller T, Sutton AJ, Shaw R, Smith JA, Young B
(2006) How can systematic reviews incorporate qualitative research? a critical perspective. Qual
Res 6(1):27–44
Dixon-WoodsM,BoothA,SuttonAJ(2007)Synthesizingqualitativeresearch:areviewofpublished
reports. Qual Res 7(3):375–422
Dixon-Woods M, Shaw RL, Agarwal S, Smith JA (2004) The problem of appraising qualitative
research. Qual Saf Health Care 13(3):223–225
Dooms M (2019) Chapter 4—stakeholder management for port sustainability: moving from ad-
hoc to structural approaches. In: Bergqvist R, Monios J (eds) Green ports: Inland and seaside
sustainable transportation strategies. Elsevier, pp 63–84.
Drewry Maritime Research (2022) Manning: annual review and forecast 2022/2023. Drewry,
London
European Commission. 2020. Study on social aspects within the maritime transport sector.
Fahy F, Rau H (2013) Methods of sustainability research in the social sciences. Sage
Fasoulis I (2023) Advancing aspects of social sustainability dimension in shipping: exploring the
role of corporate social responsibility in supporting the seafarer human sustainability declaration
framework. Aust J Marit Ocean Aff 1–21
Fasoulis I, Kurt RE (2019a) Determinants to the implementation of corporate social responsibility
in the maritime industry: a quantitative study. J Int Marit Saf, Environ Aff, Shipp 3(1–2):10–20
Fasoulis I, Kurt RE (2019b) Embracing sustainability in shipping: assessing industry’s adapta-
tions incited by the newly introduced ‘triple bottom line’ approach to sustainable maritime
development. Soc Sci 8(7)
Franklin A, Blyton P (2011) Researching sustainability: a guide to social science methods, practice
and engagement. Earthscan, London, New York
Froholdt LL (2018) The perception of corporate social responsibility in the maritime industry. In:
Froholdt LL (ed) Corporate social responsibility in the maritime industry. Springer International
Publishing, Cham, pp 5–23
Graham CAE (2009) Maritime security and seafarers’ welfare: towards harmonization. WMU J
Marit Aff 8(1):71–87
Grewal D (2018) The growth of csr and its acceptance in the maritime industry. In: Froholdt LL
(ed) Corporate social responsibility in the maritime industry. Springer International Publishing,
Cham, pp 25–42
Handford M (2007) Where’s wally? walker books Ltd
Hayes-Mejia R, Stafström M (2023) Psychosocial work environment and mental health among
the global workforce of seafarers in the wake of the covid-19 pandemic. BMC Public Health
23(1):2151
198
M. E. Manuel and A. Prylipko
Hildebrand LP, Schröder-Hinrichs JU (2014) Maritime and marine: synonyms, solitudes or
schizophrenia? WMU J Marit Aff 13(2):173–176
Hiebl MRW (2021) Sample selection in systematic literature reviews of management research.
Organ Res Methods 26(2):195–382
Hillier D, Comfort D, Jones P (2017) The two market leaders in ocean cruising and corporate
sustainability. Int J Contemp Hosp Manag 29(1):288–306
IMO and the sustainable development goals (n.d.) (Accessed 12 Jan 2021). https://www.imo.org/
en/MediaCentre/HotTopics/Pages/SustainableDevelopmentGoals.aspx
Jones P, Comfort D, Hillier D (2019) Sustainability and the world’s leading ocean cruising
companies. J Public Aff 19(1):e1609
Karagiannis I, Vouros P, Sioutas N, Evangelinos K (2022) Mapping the maritime csr agenda: a
cross-sectoral materiality analysis of sustainability reporting. J Clean Prod 338:130139
Karakasnaki M, Pantouvakis A, Vlachos I (2023) Maritime social sustainability: conceptualization
and scale development. Transp Res Part D: Transp Environ 121(103804)
Koundouri P, Chen C, González Dávila O, Giannouli A, Hernández Brito J, Kotoroni E, Mailli E,
Mintenbeck K, Papagianni C, Souliotis I (2017) A socio-economic framework for integrating
multi-use offshore platforms in sustainable blue growth management: theory and applications.
Handbook on the economics and management of sustainable oceans. Edward Elgar Publishing,
Cheltenham, UK
Kronfeld-Goharani U (2018) Maritime economy: insights on corporate visions and strategies
towards sustainability. Ocean Coast Manag 165:126–140
Kunnaala V, Rasi M, Storgård J (2013) Corporate social responsibility and shipping: views of baltic
sea shipping companies on the beneﬁts of responsibility. Publications of the Centre for Maritime
Studies University of Turku
Leal Filho W, Salvia AL, Vasconcelos CRP, Anholon R, Rampasso IS, Eustachio JHPP, Liakh O,
Dinis MAP, Olpoc RC, Bandanaa J et al (2022) Barriers to institutional social sustainability.
Sustainability Science
Littig B, Griessler E (2005) Social sustainability: a catchword between political pragmatism and
social theory. Int J Sustain Dev 8(1/2):65–79
Lund-Thomsen P, Poulsen RT, Ackrill R (2016) Corporate social responsibility in the international
shipping industry: state-of-the-art, current challenges, and future directions. J Sustain Mobil
3(2):3–13
ManuelME(2018)SafetyandriskmanagementconsiderationsforCSR.In:FroholdtLL(ed)Corpo-
rate social responsibility in the maritime industry. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp
253–278
McGuinn J, Fries-Tersch E, Jones M, Crepaldi C, Masso M, Kadarik I, Geny B et al (2020)
Social sustainability: Concepts and benchmarks (study for the committee on employment and
social affairs, policy department for economic, scientiﬁc and quality of life policies). European
Parliament, Luxembourg
Murphy K (2012) The social pillar of sustainable development: a literature review and framework
for policy analysis. Sustain: Sci, Pract Policy 8(1):15–29
Nightingale L (2023) 10 November. Industry falling short in addressing seafarer shortfall. Lloyd’s
List
Osobajo OA, Koliousis Y, McLaughlin H (2021) Stakeholder engagement: a conceptual framework
and initial validation to foster sustainability development in a maritime cluster. Eur J Sustain
Dev Res 5(1)
Ovais D (2019) Blue ocean social responsibility strategy: creating competitive advantage through
human resource policies. Int J Recent Technol Eng 8(3):591–598
Pantouvakis A, Vlachos I (2020) Talent and leadership effects on sustainable performance in the
maritime industry. Transp Res Part D: Transp Environ 86:102440
Parviainen T, Lehikoinen A, Kuikka S, Haapasaari P (2018) How can stakeholders promote
environmental and social responsibility in the shipping industry? WMU J Marit Aff 17(1):49–70
Where’s Wally? The Search for Social Sustainability in the Maritime …
199
Petticrew M, Roberts H (2006) Systematic reviews in the social sciences: a practical guide. Oxford:
Blackwell Publications, Malden, MA
Progoulaki M, Roe M (2011) Dealing with multicultural human resources in a socially responsible
manner: a focus on the maritime industry. WMU J Marit Aff 10(1):7–23
Progoulaki M, Theotokas I (2016) Managing culturally diverse maritime human resources as a
shipping company’s core competency. Marit Policy Manag 43(7):860–873
Pyć D (2020) Maritime safety culture as a condition for sustainable shipping. Sci J Marit Univ
Szczec 61(133):55–61
Rajapakse A, Emad GR (2023) Fatigue, an unsolved puzzle that continues contributing to accidents
at sea. Mar Policy 155(105745)
Sampson H (2016) Seabirds matter more than us!: understanding the complex exercise of csr in the
global shipping industry. J Sustain Mobil 3(2):101–119
Sampson H, Ellis N (2016) Elusive corporate social responsibility (CSR) in the global shipping
industry: the example of shipboard accommodation. J Glob Responsib 6(1):80–98
Saunders F, Gilek M, Ikauniece A, Tafon RV, Gee K, Zaucha J (2020) Theorizing social sustain-
ability and justice in marine spatial planning: democracy, diversity, and equity. Sustainability
12(6):2560
Shin S-H, Kwon OK, Ruan X, Chhetri P, Lee PT-W, Shahparvari S (2018) Analyzing sustainability
literature in maritime studies with text mining. Sustainability 10(10)
Sislian L, Jaegler A, Cariou P (2016) A literature review on port sustainability and ocean’s carrier
network problem. Res Transp Bus Manag 19:19–26
Spangenberg JH (2011) Sustainability science: a review, an analysis and some empirical lessons.
Environ Conserv 38(3):275–287
Stein M, Acciaro M (2020) Value creation through corporate sustainability in the port sector: a
structured literature analysis. Sustainability 12(14):5504
Stopford M (2009) Maritime economics. Routledge, London and New York
The Campbell Collaboration (2020) Forthcoming 2020 16 Dec 2020. Campbell systematic reviews:
Policies and guidelines
The, Mission to Seafarers (2023) The Seafarers Happiness Index, Quarter 3:2023
UNCTAD (2023) The review of maritime transport 2023: towards a green and just transition
United Nations (2021) Sustainable transport, sustainable development. Interagency report for
second global sustainable transport conference
Vejvar M (2019) Essays on sustainability issues in transportation management. The Hong Kong
Polytechnic University. PhD thesis
Wang X, Yuen KF, Wong YD, Li KX (2020) How can the maritime industry meet sustainable devel-
opment goals? an analysis of sustainability reports from the social entrepreneurship perspective.
Transp Res Part D: Transp Environ 78
Wu X, Zhang L, Luo M (2020) Discerning sustainability approaches in shipping. Environ Dev
Sustain 22:5169–5184
Yuen KF, Li KX, Xu G, Wang X, Wong YD (2019a) A taxonomy of resources for sustainable
shipping management: their interrelationships and effects on business performance. Transp Res
Part d: Transp Environ 128:316–332
Yuen KF, Wang X, Wong YD, Ma F (2019b) A contingency view of the effects of sustainable
shipping exploitation and exploration on business performance. Transp Policy 77:90–103
Yuen KF, Wang X, Wong YD, Li KX (2020) The role of stakeholder participation and sustain-
ability integration in maritime transport: a structure-conduct-performance analysis. Transp
Policy 99:44–53
Zhou Y, Li X, Yuen KF (2023) Sustainable shipping: a critical review for a uniﬁed framework and
future research agenda. Mar Policy 148:105478
Incorporating Existential Risks
into Sustainable Development Research
Bertrand G. Guillaume
Abstract In this chapter, I investigate dimensions of current sustainable develop-
ment research in the face of existential risks, i.e. potential global threats to humanity
that could lead to human extinction or civilizational collapse. My methodology
includesliteraturereviews,historicalresearchandhermeneuticsofideas.Iﬁrstsketch
the history of sustainable development and describe the evolution of sustainability
research and science. I then question the interplay between sustainable development
research and the imperative of actually safeguarding no less than human survival.
After exploring of existing connections based on two different frameworks, I turn
to the history and recent development of existential risks research and suggest a
more coupled agenda for upcoming research. Based on scholarship, I ﬁnally suggest
two basic options for safeguarding the future and discuss them in terms of strategic
prospects or pathways.
Keywords Sustainable development · Existential risks · Research · Future ·
Planetary
1
Introduction: Sustainable Development
and the Evolution of Sustainability Research
During the twentieth century, the grand narratives of progress, growth, and develop-
ment forged within Western culture up through modernity, were reconsidered. Espe-
cially after World War II, both the failure of the global economy to fairly distribute
wealth worldwide and the looming environmental crisis made it obvious that a new
paradigm was required (Du Pisani 2006).
The elaboration of the idea of sustainable development (SD) was ﬁrst focused
on the rational use and conservation of natural resources (UNESCO 1970) in line
B. G. Guillaume (B)
Université de Technologie de Troyes (UTT), Troyes, France
e-mail: bertrand.guillaume@utt.fr
European University of Technology (EUT+), Dublin, Ireland
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_12
201
202
B. G. Guillaume
with earlier concerns in human history regarding the depletion of energy reserves
such as wood and coal. In 1972 the report to the Club of Rome entitled The Limits
to Growth alerted that our planet had a ﬁnite supply of resources and that popu-
lation and economic growth could excess what the natural systems may support.
Should the socioeconomic trends remain steady, the most likely outcome would be
a catastrophic decline in world population and industrial production over the course
of the 21th century (Meadows et al. 1972). The modeling has been criticized on both
methodological and epistemological grounds (Guillaume 2023). Also, such a dire
forecast may have dramatized the question of environmental constraints at the time
(Mebratu 1998). However, the phenomenon of “overshoot and collapse” exhibited
by the model was an unsustainable prospect indeed! The ﬁrst in a series of decennial
international meetings on the global ecological crisis, a UN conference on the human
environment held in Stockholm started promoting the idea of SD institutionally in
the very same year (UN 1972).
By the end of the 1980s, the new SD paradigm gained popularity and provided us
with a deﬁnition. After the term was used in the World Conservation Strategy (1980)
of the International Union for the Conservation of Nature, the UN World Commission
on Environment and Development issued the “Brundtland report” (1987). Entitled
Our Common Future, the document deﬁned SD as “development that meets the needs
of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their
own needs” and emphasized two associated key imbalances, namely the inequity of
the allocation of wealth worldwide and the global pressure on the environment and
the biosphere because of the features of the existing sociotechnological complex.
(WCED 1987).
So, after an “embryonic period” (before 1972) and a “molding period” (1972–
1987) for the theory of SD (Shi et al. 2019), the time came for a third “developing
period” (1987–present), paving the road for sustainability science (NRC 1999; Kates
et al. 2001). This new dynamic ﬁeld of research and innovation aimed at promoting
what the National Research Council has labeled a “transition toward sustainabil-
ity”, namely fostering our capacity to reduce poverty and meet the needs of human
population together with sustaining the life support systems of the biosphere (Clark
2007).
From a primary focus on gaining better knowledge into the complex interactions
between human and environmental systems, sustainability science has expanded to
practical inquiries into the resolution of urgent human problems (Hajian and Kashani
2021) through the establishment of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with
the ratiﬁcation of the 2030 Agenda for SD framework (UN 2015). With a range of
scientiﬁc approaches, numerous studies have been published regarding the 17 SDGs
built upon the accomplishments of the former 8 Millennium Goals (2000). Research
has been mainly involved with the need for a shared understanding of the SDGs and
their practical operationalization (Sachs et al. 2019), or with different assessments of
the interplay between them, including synergies and possible conﬂicts (Scharlemann
et al. 2020).
Incorporating Existential Risks into Sustainable Development Research
203
2
The Interplay Between Sustainable Development (SD)
and Existential Risks (ER) Research
In this context, recent scholarship has exempliﬁed the importance to make explicit
again in SD research the imperative of actually safeguarding no less than human
survival. Should SD be conceived of as a social output aiming at achieving
human development within ecological limits through the co-production of innova-
tive knowledge and active practices (Norström et al. 2020), the complex interactions
among the 17 SDGs can for instance be investigated through a simple 3-categories
matrix approach in order to help promote sound and consistent policies for both
technological and institutional change (Bojie et al. 2019).
One category includes SDG-1 (no poverty), SDG-3 (good health and well-being),
SDG-4 (quality education), SDG-5 (gender equality), SDG-8 (decent work and
economic growth), SDG-10 (reduced inequalities), and SDG-16 (peace and justice).
Called “expected objectives”, it focuses on normative goals related to “the good
life”. Centered on the distribution of goods and services and the internalization
of sustainability-oriented norms within society, achieving this set of goals should
arguably rely on cultural change and institutional innovation in the ﬁrst place, thereby
calling for research across the social, political and behavioral sciences (Davis et al.
2018).
Another category includes SDG-2 (zero hunger), SDG-6 (clean water and sanita-
tion), SDG-7 (affordable and clean energy), SDG-14 (life below water), and SDG-15
(life on land). Labeled “essential needs”, it deals precisely with the necessity for SD
to satisfy basic requirements for human societies while safeguarding the functioning
of the life-support systems of the Earth in the Anthropocene (Griggs et al. 2013).
This set of goals refers to the very conditions of human survival in the long run,
which basically depends on food, water and energy resources, and the stable state of
the planetary machinery including the provision of terrestrial and oceanic ecosystem
services. This depends to a large extent on advances based on science and engineering
in resource use efﬁciency, net waste reduction and lower material and energy ﬂows
at all scales, and calls for innovations likely to satisfy basic needs while reducing the
pressure on the planet (Davis et al. 2018).
The last category includes SDG-9 (industry, innovation and infrastructures), SDG-
11 (sustainable cities and communities), SDG-12 (responsible consumption and
production), SDG-13 (climate action), and SDG-17 (partnerships for the goals).
Entitled “governance”, it encompasses the management and regulation of economic
or geopolitical competitions, as well as the establishment and enforcement of fair
systems and practices which can ensure the compatibility of the former two sets of
goals (at worst), or even maximize the ﬁrst under the constraints of the second one (at
best). This entails accountable management systems and new equity norms in envi-
ronmental politics when it comes to climate action in the industrial and agricultural
sectors, the resilience of infrastructures and communities, and mutually beneﬁcial
relationships between developed and developing countries (Okereke 2008).
204
B. G. Guillaume
Another exampleof suchascholarshipis thetwoconcentricrings of the“doughnut
economics” (Raworth 2017), which also articulates a set of normative welfare targets
(“social foundation”) with a set of strict ecological constraints (“ecological ceiling”).
Speciﬁcally, the latter follows directly the planetary boundaries framework, which
provides a science-based inquiry into the risk that the Earth system could be destabi-
lized at the planetary scale, thus jeopardizing our future, several limits being already
transgressed, pushing the planet outside the Holocenic “safe operating space for
humanity” (Rockström et al. 2009; Steffen et al. 2015; Richardson et al. 2023).
Still, it has been argued that the possibility, or the likelihood, of the extinction of
humankind in the decades or centuries to come is the “elephant in the (living) room”
in the literature on SD and the Anthropocene, such a prospect being mentioned on rare
occasions eventually, and being probably under-estimated anyway (Stewart 2023).
Therefore, SD research should integrate further in its development existential risks
(ER) research in order to safeguard the future, going back to the core of inquiries into
the history and the future of people on Earth, which have suggested that humanity is
now facing an alternative: sustainability or collapse (Costanza et al. 2006, 2007).
Surveying ER research in Western culture reveals the long intellectual history
of thinking about human extinction. Apocalyptic thought has a staggeringly proliﬁc
record in past centuries, from cosmogonies and religions in Antiquity, eschatological
imagination and the end of time in the Middle Ages, through Enlightenment and
modernity, scientiﬁc discoveries of the nineteenth century (e.g. the second law of
thermodynamics, new evolutionary theory and geological history of the Earth), up to
the nuclear era and the build-out of SD in the twentieth century, and current anxieties
about the Anthropocene, climate change, global outbreaks, or advanced artiﬁcial
intelligence (Torres 2023).
However, genuine ER research has only really blossomed during the last two
decades or so. It refers to the study of global catastrophic risks which could result
either in the irreversible destruction of our civilization (impacting both current and
future generations) or, even more radically, the terminal and permanent extinction of
humankind without any recovery. Existential risks can be formally deﬁned as “risks
that threaten the premature extinction of Earth-originating intelligent life or the
permanent and drastic destruction of its potential for desirable future development”
(Bostrom 2013) or risks that threaten “the destruction of humanity’s long-term
potential” (Ord 2020).
Such threats encompass events, processes, or phenomena likely to hinder the
(sustainable) development of humanity but also its long-term survival on a global
scale. Back to 2003, the ways ER could threaten the future of humankind in the course
of the twenty-ﬁrst century were investigated. They include environmental disasters
for sure (e.g. extreme global warming, ecological collapse, toxic waste accumula-
tion and pollution, as well as super-volcanoes, massive earthquakes or tsunamis, and
large asteroids), but also acts of terrorism or war-induced consequences (e.g. atomic
bombs and nuclear winter, chemical or biological weapons, genetically engineered
organisms released on purpose) and scientiﬁc errors or technological mayhem (e.g.
Incorporating Existential Risks into Sustainable Development Research
205
computers or machines taking over„ accidents with nano- or bio-technologies, unin-
tended consequence of DNA alteration, experiments in fundamental physics gone
wrong), all things that could wipe out mankind (Rees 2003).
Progressively, research centers on ER have been established worldwide, e.g. the
FutureofHumanityInstituteatOxfordUniversity(UK),theGlobalCatastrophicRisk
Institute (US), the Centre for the Study of Existential Risk at Cambridge University
(UK), the Global Challenges Foundation (SE), the Global Survivability Institute at
Kyoto University (JP), the Future of Life Institute (US). Additionally, university
courses and academic workshops have been given on ER at the University of Copen-
hagen (DE), the University of Gothenburg (SE), the University of Warwick (UK),
and Harvard University (US), among others (Currie and ÓhÉigeartaigh 2018).
Together with the characterization of such global catastrophic risks, inquiries into
both mitigation options and ethical thinking have been discussed in international
scholarship. Among the core concepts of ER research are longtermism and “further-
loss”. Longtermism is based on the idea that we should care much more for future
people, because their lives do count and have moral relevance, also their numbers
could be huge (the largest part of human beings who will ever live have probably
not been born yet), and we have the power to affect their existence and to harm
them in the long run (MacAskill 2022). The “further-loss” idea is based on the view
that avoiding the end of humankind should be our critical moral priority, the non-
existence of future generations being the greatest loss. The argument is that a global
catastrophe completely wiping out the human species would not only destroy our
present, but also annihilate our future, making the destruction of humanity “by far
the greatest of all conceivable crimes” according to classical utilitarianism. (Parﬁt
1986; Torres 2023).
While its ethical stance provides strong support for longtermism and “further-
loss” approaches to the future, it is doubtful that certain aspects of SD research
can actually safeguard human life and civilization in the long run. Should inquiries
into ER be taken seriously, some dimensions of current SD research and strategic
options for the future should be investigated further (and to some extent criticized)
in order to design a more coupled agenda for upcoming SD-ER research in the face
of catastrophic risks likely to threaten the future existence of humankind and its
long-term potential.
3
Two Basic Options for Safeguarding Planetary Futures,
and Their Strategic Prospects
In order to sketch items to be considered in designing such an integrated research
agenda, a recent study is of special interest. Blending the planetary boundaries frame-
work and ecological/material “footprint” indicators for various consumption-based
resource ﬂows, it assesses SD at the national level for a series of countries worldwide.
It is shown that meeting the basic human needs of their citizens today, extended to all
206
B. G. Guillaume
people on Earth universally on a per capita basis, can actually be achieved within the
biophysical limits of critical planetary processes (e.g. biogeochemical cycles) and
sustainable use of natural resources (e.g. water, energy, raw materials) in either of
two ways. Restrict the spectrum of the normative needs to be satisﬁed, or increase by
a factor of 2–6 the efﬁciency of the physical and institutional “provisioning systems”
(technology/infrastructures, markets/governments), which connect the use of natural
resources to welfare (O‘Neill et al. 2018).
Consider the ﬁrst option. Such a move would of course promote the view that more
is not always better, and imply acknowledging the social and ecological damages
of over-consumption in rich countries, together with developing new principles,
behaviors, and norms of “sufﬁciency” for our time (Princen 2005). It would also
fuel the debates about at last shifting away from GDP-oriented policies towards new
metrics of progress, “steady-states” economies or “degrowth” approaches (Costanza
etal.2014;Kerschner2010).However,withthisstrategyalone,only“physicalneeds”
would be met in average (namely, according to authors, nutrition, sanitation, access
to electricity, no extreme poverty) without any other higher targets achieved (i.e.
high life satisfaction, healthy life expectancy, secondary education, social support,
democratic quality, income equality), and just for a population of seven billions
(O‘Neill et al. 2018) ! Additionally, a second study establishes that countries are
already exceeding ecological limits much faster than they are meeting the basic needs
of people (Fanning et al. 2022), pushing them to further lower standards according
to this logic.
If standards of living can for sure be lowered to some extent in many rich countries
without signiﬁcantly changing their welfare levels, it is doubtful that a generalized
“degrowth”optionisasoundstrategyforthefutureof9.0–12.5billionpeopleby2100
according to current trends in global population size (UN 2022). First, it is disputable
that the outcome could then be labeled SD at all, depending on the actual quality
of life achievable eventually. Second, while it would clearly decrease the likelihood
of some ER (e.g. for environmental disasters: extreme global warming, toxic waste
accumulation and pollution, ecological collapse), it would also probably leave us
defenseless in the face of other ER (e.g. super-volcanoes, massive earthquakes or
tsunamis, asteroids).
However, it has been claimed that we could undergo a complete collapse should
such a radical rearrangement not be accomplished soon enough. All we have to
do, it is argued, is to halve the scale of our operations and reconsider afresh the
idea of progress we inherited towards “not a (simple) diminution [but] a veritable
transformation: the quest for progress liberated from the quest for power.” (Stewart
2023). Explicitly referring to the idea of “neganthropology” in contemporary philos-
ophy (Stiegler 2017), it is in fact an old anthropological distinction, which becomes
apparentagain,between“cold”and“hot”humansocieties,thoselikeclocksandthose
like steam-engines. In the ﬁrst case, so-called “primitive” societies tend to persevere
in their being while they are surrounded by the external ﬂow of events. Therefore,
they appear static and an-historical. In the second case, so-called “civilized” societies
internalize historical change and make it a driver of their development. Therefore,
they appear dynamic and evolving in time (Levi-Strauss 1966, 1967).
Incorporating Existential Risks into Sustainable Development Research
207
Again, this is perfectly sound in the context of SD research, especially in the
framework of a strong precautionary approach (Guillaume, 2012), and even regarding
some ER (especially the ones which are directly related to potential dire effects of
modern technology), but it would leave us helpless in the face of other ER (just to
mention a few: global outbreaks, hostile attacks, asteroid collisions).
Now consider the second option exempliﬁed in the study (O‘Neill et al. 2018),
namelyimprovingthe“provisioningsystems”asastrategytoachievegoodlifewithin
ecological limits worldwide. Physical improvements would involve approaches well-
known in SD research and practices: decoupling in energy and material consump-
tion through e.g. waste reduction, industrial ecology and circular economy schemes
(McDowall et al. 2017), deploying innovations such as passive energy systems across
economic sectors (Cullen et al. 2011), or achieving carbon–neutral economies by
reducing greenhouse gas emissions and strengthening natural carbon sinks (Walsh
et al. 2017). Social improvements would be necessary in order to limit direct and indi-
rect “rebound effects” on consumption, which are usually observed as the efﬁciency
of systems increases (Freeman 2018), and to improve social support and income
equality (non-intensive in resource use but inﬂuencing positively welfare), as well
as self-reported life satisfaction (intensive in resource use but also achievable by
non-material factors), as stressed by colleagues (O‘Neill et al. 2018).
Here the features of such a strategic option for SD seems mostly congruent with a
watchful and responsible oversight of ER, just as e.g. developing knowledge, educa-
tion, and transparency (or even well-argued targeted speciﬁc post-growth policies!).
This means that any sound future agenda for SD research to include ER research
could be based on the lineaments of “provisioning systems” rearranged in this way
to allow all people to live a good life with the critical limits of resource use.
At least two important difﬁculties remain, however. First, the kind of pathway
needed is incredibly ambitious, for meeting universal basic human development on
the planet in compliance with the SDGs without transgressing unsafe ecological
limits would mean achieving an unprecedented ×2–×6 net gain in efﬁciency, say in
tribute a factor 4 in average (Weizsäcker et al. 1998). Second, just as among SDGs,
conﬂicts can exist between SD and ER research, or even within ER research alone,
calling for complicated trade-offs. For instance, boosting cleaner energy systems
and industrial production or sustainable manufacturing through advanced artiﬁcial
intelligence or nanobots may ultimately represent a global catastrophic risk, should
we proceed then? Improving food security and agriculture through sophisticated
DNA technologies may be dangerous eventually… Perhaps in a near future, lunar or
martian settlements and space travel conceived of as redundancies for human life in
the solar system will require great destructive energies like fusion reactors. And so
on.
For these reasons, more dual and articulated SD-ER research is needed and should
be encouraged, together with making more efﬁcient use of natural resources and envi-
ronmental systems to reduce extreme poverty (Cernev and Fenner 2020). Similarly,
SD research has been applied to design and implement policies for the conserva-
tion of nature and planetary life-support systems, and should be extended to other
prospects likely to threaten human survival beyond climate change (Awang 2021).
208
B. G. Guillaume
4
Conclusion: Towards More Congruence Between
Sustainability Research and Existential Risks
The idea of “sustainable development” (SD) emerged in the late twentieth century
as a new paradigm associated with two fundamental imbalances i.e. the inequity
of the worldwide allocation of wealth and the global pressure on the environment
and the biosphere. In the last decades, SD research has dealt with the resolution of
corresponding urgent human problems within the framework of the UN Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) and with inquiries into the complex interactions between
human and critical environmental systems through time, both in the past and towards
the future, suggesting that humanity is facing an alternative in the Anthropocene:
sustainability or collapse.
Considering also so-called “existential risks” (ER) i.e. events, processes, or
phenomena likely to irremediably jeopardize the long-term survival of humanity
on a global scale, this chapter argues that SD research should integrate further in its
development ER research, beyond climate change and ecosystem collapse, in order
to safeguard the future. The agendas for SD and ER research can be more or less
congruent, or more or less conﬂicting, depending on the strategies considered. As
suggested in this chapter, we could for instance experience both sustainability and
collapse!
While physical and social improvements of “provisioning systems” seem in ﬁrst
analysis a sound strategy (together with the development of knowledge, education,
and transparency and arguably targeted post-growth policies) to both achieve good
life within ecological limits worldwide and allow for a watchful and responsible
oversight of existential risks, SD research and ER research should obviously be better
articulated worldwide, their interlinkages carefully investigated, and the associated
trade-offs further analyzed on a systematic basis. From the point of view of integrated
SD-ER research, using natural resources and environmental systems more efﬁciently
to reduce poverty and ensure human development in the long run is indeed necessary,
but not sufﬁcient, for as a species we are prone to other catastrophic global risks
beyond climate change and biodiversity loss in our co-evolution with the planet, life
and the Universe.
References
DuPisaniJA(2006)Sustainabledevelopment:Historicalrootsoftheconcept.EnvSciences3(2):83–
96. https://doi.org/10.1080/15693430600688831
UNESCO (1970) Use and conservation of the biosphere: proceedings of the intergovernmental
conference of experts on the scientiﬁc basis for rational use and conservation of the resources of
the biosphere. United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Organization, Paris. https://
unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000067785
Guillaume B (2023) Global models of sustainability and values. In: Leal Filho W, Azul AM, Doni
F, Lange Salvia A (eds) Handbook of sustainability science in the future. Springer, pp 847–854.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04560-8_15
Incorporating Existential Risks into Sustainable Development Research
209
Meadows DH, Meadows DL, Randers J, Behrens WW (1972) A report for the Club of Rome‘s
project on the predicament of mankind. Universe Books, NY
Mebratu D (1998) Sustainability and sustainable development: historical and conceptual review.
Environ Impact Assess Rev 18(6):493–520. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0195-9255(98)00019-5
UN(1972)DeclarationoftheUnitedNationsconferenceonthehumanenvironment.UnitedNations,
Stockholm
WCED (1987) Our common future. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Shi L, Han L, Yang F, Gao L (2019) The evolution of sustainable development theory: types, goals,
and research prospects. Sustainability 11(24):7158. https://doi.org/10.3390/su11247158
Kates RW, Clark WC, Corell R, Hall JM, Jaeger CC, Lowe I, McCarthy JJ, Schellnhuber HJ, Bolin
B, Dickson NM, Faucheux S, Gallopin GC, Grübler A, Huntley B, Jäger J, Johda NS, Kasperson
RE, Mabogunje A, Matson P, Mooney H, Moore B, O’Riordan T, Svedin U (2001) Sustainability
science. Science 292(5517):641–642. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1059386
NRC (1999) Our common journey. The National Academies Press, Washington DC. https://doi.
org/10.17226/9690
Clark WC (2007) Sustainability science: a room of its own. PNAS 104(6):1737–1738. https://doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.0611291104
Hajian M, Kshani SJ (2021) Evolution of the concept of sustainability: from Brundtland Report to
sustainable development goals. In: Hussain CM, Velasco-Muñoz JF (eds) Sustainable resource
management. Elsevier, pp 1–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-824342-8.00018-3
UN, (2015) Transforming our world: the 2030 agenda for sustainable development. United Nations,
NY
Sachs JD, Schmidt-Traub G, Mazzucato M, Messner D. Nakicenovic N, Rockström J (2019) Six
transformations to achieve the sustainable development goals. Nat Sustain 2:805–814.https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41893-019-0352-9
Scharlemann JPW, Brock RC, Balfour N, Brown C, Burgess ND, Guth MK, Ingram DJ, Lane
R, Martin JGC, Wincander S, Kapos V (2020) Towards understanding interactions between
sustainable development goals: the role of environment–human linkages. Sustain Sci 15:1573–
1584. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-020-00799-6
Bojie F, Shuai W, Junze Z, Zengqian H, Jinghai L (2019) Unravelling the complexity in achieving
the 17 sustainable-development goals. Nat Sci Rev 6(3):386–388. https://doi.org/10.1093/nsr/
nwz038
Norström AV, Cvitanovic C, Löf MF, West S, Wyborn C, Balvanera P, Bednarek AT, Bennett EM,
Biggs R, de Bremond A, Campbell BM, Canadell JG, Carpenter SR, Folke C, Fulton EA,
Gaffney O, Gelcich S, Jouffray JB, Leach M, Le Tissier M, Martín-López B, Louder E, Loutre
MF, Meadow AM, Nagendra H, Payne D, Peterson GD, Reyers B, Scholes R, Ifejika Speranza
C, Spierenburg M, Stafford-Smith M, Tengö M, van der Hel S, van Putten I, Österblom H
(2020) Principles for knowledge co-production in sustainability research. Nat Sustain 3:182–
190. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-019-0448-2
Davis T, Hennes EP, Raymond L (2018) Cultural evolution of normative motivations for sustainable
behaviour. Nat Sustain 1:218–224. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-018-0061-9
Griggs D, Stafford-Smith M, Gaffney O, Rockström J, Öhman MC, Shyamsundar P, Steffen W,
Glaser G, Kanie N, Noble I (2013) Sustainable development goals for people and planet. Nature
495:305–307. https://doi.org/10.1038/495305a
Okereke C (2008) Equity norms in global environmental governance. Global Environ Polit 8(3):25–
50. https://doi.org/10.1162/glep.2008.8.3.25
Raworth K (2017) Why it’s time for doughnut economics. IPPR ProgIve Rev 24(3):216–222. https://
doi.org/10.1111/newe.12058
Rockström J, Steffen W, Noone K, Persson Å, Chapin FS, Lambin EF, Lenton TM, Scheffer M,
Folke C, Schellnhuber HJ, Nykvist B, de Wit CA, Hughes T, van der Leeuw S, Rohde H, Sörlin
S, Snyder PK, Costanza R, Svedin U, Falkenmark M, Karlberg L, Corell RW, Fabry VJ, Hansen
J, Walker B, Liverman D, Richardson K, Crutzen P, Foley JA (2009) A safe operating space for
humanity. Nature 461:472–475. https://doi.org/10.1038/461472a
210
B. G. Guillaume
Steffen W, Richardson K, Rockström J, Cornell SE, Fetzer I, Bennett EM, Biggs R, Carpenter SR,
De Vries W, de Wit CA, Folke C, Gerten D, Heinke J, Mace GM, Persson LM, Ramanathan V,
Reyers B, Sverker S (2015) Planetary boundaries: guiding human development on a changing
planet. Science 347(6223). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1259855
Richardson K, Steffen W, Lucht W, Bendtsen J, Cornell SE, Donges JF, Drüke M, Fetzer I, Bala
G, von Bloh W, Feulner G, Fiedler S, Gerten D, Gleeson T, Hofmann M, Huiscamp W, Kummu
M, Mohan C, Nogués-Bravo D, Petri S, Porkka M, Rahmstorf S,Schaphoff S, Thonicke K,
Tobian A, Virkki V, Wang-Erlandsson L, Weber L, Rockström J (2023) Earth beyond six of nine
planetary boundaries. Sci Adv 9(37). https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adh2458
Stewart J (2023) The Anthropocene: where are we going? In: Loeve S, Guchet X, Bensaude Vincent
B (eds) French philosophy of technology. Springer, Berlin, pp 227–235. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-89518-5
Costanza R, Graumlich LJ, Steffen W (2006) Sustainability or collapse: Lessons from integrating
the history of humans and the rest of Nature. In: Costanza R, Graumlich LJ, Steffen W (eds)
Sustainability or Collapse?: an integrated history and future of people on Earth. MIT Press, pp
3–18. https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/6572.001.0001
Costanza R, Graumlich L, Steffen W, Crumley C, Dearing J, Hibbard K, Leemans R, Redman C,
Schimel D (2007) Sustainability or collapse: what can we learn from integrating the history of
humans and the rest of nature? Ambio 36(7):522–527. https://doi.org/10.1579/0044-7447(200
7)36[522:SOCWCW]2.0.CO;2
Ord T (2020) The precipice: existential risk and the future of humanity. Hachette, NY
Bostrom N (2013) Existential risk prevention as global priority. Global Pol 4(1):15–23. https://doi.
org/10.1111/1758-5899.12002
Rees M (2003) Our ﬁnal century. Heinemann, London
Torres EP (2023) Human extinction: a history of the science and ethics of annihilation. Routledge,
NY
Currie AM, ÓhÉigeartaigh S (2018) Working together to face humanity’s greatest threats: intro-
duction to the future of research in catastrophic and existential risk. Futures 102:1–5.https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.futures.2018.07.003
MacAskill W (2022) What we owe the future. Basic Books, NY
Parﬁt D (1986) Reasons and persons. Oxford University Press, Oxford. https://doi.org/10.1093/019
824908X.001.0001
O’Neill DW, Fanning AL, Lamb WF, Steinberger JK (2018) A good life for all within planetary
boundaries. Nat Sustain 1:88–95. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-018-0021-4
Fanning AL, O’Neill DW, Hickel J, Roux N (2022) The social shortfall and ecological overshoot
of nations. Nat Sustain 5(1):26–36. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-021-00799-z
Princen T (2005) The logic of sufﬁciency. MIT Press, Cambridge
Costanza R, Kubiszewski I, Giovannini E, Lovins H, McGlade J, Pickett KE, Ragnarsdóttir KV,
Roberts D, De Vogli R, Wilkinson R (2014) Time to leave GDP behind. Nature 505:283–285.
https://doi.org/10.1038/505283a
Kerschner C (2010) Economic de-growth versus steady-state economy. J Clean Prod 18(6):544–551.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2009.10.019
Stiegler B (2017) Escaping the anthropocene. In: Magatti M (ed) The crisis conundrum. How to
reconcile economy and society, Springer, pp 149–163
UN (2022) World population prospects: summary of results. United Nations, NY
Levi-Strauss C (1966) The savage mind. University Chicago Press, Chicago
Levi-Strauss C (1967) The scope of anthropology. J Cape, London
Guillaume B (2012) The spirit of precaution. Revue De Métaphysique Et De Morale 76(4):491–509.
https://doi.org/10.3917/rmm.124.0491
Freeman R (2018) A theory on the future of the rebound effect in a resource-constrained world.
Front Energy Res 6:81. https://doi.org/10.3389/fenrg.2018.00081
Cullen JM, Allwood JM, Borgstein EH (2011) Reducing energy demand: what are the practical
limits? Environ Sci Technol 45:1711–1718. https://doi.org/10.1021/es102641n
Incorporating Existential Risks into Sustainable Development Research
211
McDowall W, Geng Y, Huang B, Barteková E, Bleischwitz R, Türkeli S, Kemp R, Doménech T
(2017) Circular economy policies in China and Europe. J Ind Ecol 21(3):651–661. https://doi.
org/10.1111/jiec.12597
Walsh B, Ciais P, Janssens IA, Peñuelas J, Riahi K, Rydzak F, van Vuuren DP, Obersteiner M (2017)
Pathways for balancing CO2 emissions and sinks. Nat Commun 8(14856). https://doi.org/10.
1038/ncomms14856
WeizsäckerEU,LovinsAB,HunterLovinsL(1998)Factorfour:doublingwealth—halvingresource
use: the new report to the club of Rome. Earthscan, London
Awang MB (2021) Sustainability and existential risks with special reference to climate change—an
overview, IOP Conf Ser: Earth Environ Sci 810(012012). https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/
810/1/012012
Cernev T, Fenner R (2020) The importance of achieving foundational sustainable development goals
in reducing global risk. Futures 115(102492). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2019.102492
Circular Economy Adoption
in Construction: A Pathway
to Sustainable Development and UN SDG
11 Achievement
Rayra Brandão and Livia Verissimo
Abstract This article explores how the adoption of circular economy principles in
the construction industry can contribute to the achievement of the UN Sustainable
Development Goal 11, which aims to make cities and communities more inclusive,
safe, resilient and sustainable. Adopting a circular economy approach to construction
can reduce waste, reuse materials and promote healthier and more sustainable built
environments. The article highlights key factors driving the adoption of the circular
economy in the construction industry, including environmental concerns, resource
scarcity, cost savings and regulatory pressure. However, there are several barriers
that can impede the adoption and implementation of circular economy in construc-
tion, such as lack of awareness and understanding of circular economy principles
and difﬁculty in tracking materials and products throughout their lifecycle. Over-
coming these challenges requires greater awareness, investment in new technologies
and favorable regulatory frameworks. It is concluded that the adoption of circular
economy principles can signiﬁcantly contribute to building a more sustainable and
equitable future.
Keywords Circular economy · Civil construction · United Nations · Sustainable
Development Goals
1
Introduction
Strengthening the connection between this chapter and the book’s theme of Sustain-
able Research, we delve into the burgeoning concept of the circular economy, which
has garnered widespread attention in recent years, especially in diverse industries.
R. Brandão (B)
Business School, Rural Federal University of the Amazon (UFRA), Tomé-Açu, PA, Brazil
e-mail: rayra.brandao@ufra.edu.br
L. Verissimo
Bachelor’s degree program in Geology at the University of São Paulo (USP), São Paulo, SP, Brazil
e-mail: liviaverissimo@usp.br
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_13
213
214
R. Brandão and L. Verissimo
Among these, the construction sector stands out as a major global player, yet it also
bears a hefty responsibility for signiﬁcant waste generation. Therefore, integrating
circular economy principles into construction practices emerges as a pivotal strategy
for mitigating the industry’s environmental impact and fostering sustainability (Ruiz,
et al. 2020).
Indeed, the construction industry’s footprint on the environment is profound. A
report from the United Nations Environment Programme underscores this, revealing
that the sector contributes to 40% of global waste generation and 11% of green-
house gas emissions worldwide. Moreover, its voracious appetite for resources sees
it devouring 36% of global energy and 40% of raw materials (Brandão et al. 2020).
Central to the challenge lies the issue of construction waste, encompassing
materials like concrete, wood, metal, and plastics. The production processes
involved in handling these materials also yield signiﬁcant greenhouse gas emissions,
exacerbating environmental concerns (Poon et al. 2001).
Enter the circular economy—a beacon of hope for reducing construction waste
(Ruiz et al. 2020). This paradigm shift entails the reuse, repair, refurbishment, and
recycling of materials, aiming to minimize waste and maximize resource efﬁciency.
Embracing principles like waste elimination, product longevity, and ecosystem
regeneration, the circular economy offers a holistic approach to sustainable construc-
tion (Huovila et al. 2019).
The adoption of circular economy principles in construction is not merely a trend
but a necessity driven by a conﬂuence of factors. Environmental imperatives, resource
scarcity, economic viability, and regulatory pressures converge to compel the industry
towards sustainability. With mounting concerns over waste generation and emissions,
stakeholders are increasingly pushing for sustainable practices (Arora et al. 2020).
The construction industry heavily relies on natural resources such as wood,
minerals, and metals, extracted from the Earth’s crust. These resources are ﬁnite,
and their extraction can have negative environmental and social impacts, including
deforestation, air and water pollution, and displacement of local communities. There-
fore, the industry has a signiﬁcant impact on the achievement of the United Nations
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), particularly SDG 11: Sustainable Cities
and Communities. The adoption of circular economy principles in the construction
industry can contribute to the attainment of SDG 11 by promoting more sustainable
and inclusive built environments (Ghaffar, Burman, and Braimah 2020).
This article discusses the potential of the circular economy in the construction
industry, with a speciﬁc focus on the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal
(SDG) 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities. The paper provides literature-based
insights into the circular economy in the construction industry and prompts an inves-
tigation into the broader environmental implications and impacts when considered
in the context of the UN SDGs Agenda 17. The argument is made for prioritizing
not only localized collaborative thinking and approaches but also adopting a united
international approach, given globalization, global economic indices, and sustainable
development goals that involve partnerships and the cross-pollination of knowledge,
expertise, and experience.
Circular Economy Adoption in Construction: A Pathway to Sustainable …
215
The burgeoning concept of the circular economy presents a promising pathway
towards sustainability, especially within the construction industry, which stands as
one of the largest contributors to global waste production and resource consump-
tion. This chapter explores the transformative potential of the circular economy in
addressing the environmental challenges inherent in construction practices, thereby
aligning closely with the overarching theme of Sustainable Research.
2
Sustainable Research Role in the Circular Economy
Within the Construction Industry
Sustainable research plays a pivotal role in advancing the Circular Economy within
the construction industry, aligning with the overarching objectives of the United
Nations’ 11th Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) focused on Sustainable Cities
and Communities. One avenue of sustainable research involves the exploration
and development of innovative materials that adhere to circular principles. This
could include the creation of eco-friendly, recycled, or upcycled materials, thereby
contributing to SDG 12 (Responsible Consumption and Production) by reducing
resource depletion and waste in construction projects (Sala 2019).
At its core, sustainability in construction entails the responsible management of
resources, minimization of environmental impact, and promotion of social equity
and economic prosperity. Traditional linear models of construction, characterized
by “take-make-dispose” practices, have led to rampant resource depletion, waste
generation, and ecological degradation. In contrast, the circular economy paradigm
offers a transformative approach, emphasizing the principles of reduce, reuse,
recycle, and regenerate. By fostering a closed-loop system where materials and
resources are continuously circulated within the economy, the circular economy
aims to decouple economic growth from resource consumption and environmental
degradation (Lobato et al. 2024).
Furthermore, sustainable research can delve into life-cycle assessments, providing
a comprehensive analysis of the environmental impact associated with construc-
tion projects. By scrutinizing the entire life cycle—from material extraction to
disposal—researchers can contribute to both SDG 12 and SDG 13 (Climate Action)
by promoting sustainable practices and mitigating the carbon footprints associated
with construction activities (Backes and Traverso 2022).
Circular design principles form another crucial aspect of sustainable research in
the construction industry. Researchers can focus on developing design concepts that
prioritize circularity, emphasizing structures that are easily disassembled and mate-
rials that can be seamlessly reintegrated into the circular economy. Such initiatives
align with SDG 9 (Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure) and SDG 11, working
towards the establishment of sustainable cities and communities (Baldassarre et al.
2020).
216
R. Brandão and L. Verissimo
Efforts to reduce construction waste can be a focal point of sustainable research,
exploring strategies that minimize waste generation through efﬁcient construction
methods and responsible material usage. This directly contributes to SDG 12 by
addressing the sustainable consumption and production practices advocated by the
United Nations (Calvo et al. 2014).
Integrating smart technologies into construction processes is another avenue for
sustainable research. The use of sensors, IoT devices, and data analytics can optimize
resource management, providing real-time insights into resource consumption and
efﬁciency. This aligns with both SDG 9, focusing on industry and infrastructure
innovation, and SDG 12, emphasizing responsible consumption and production (Lim
et al. 2021).
In the realm of sustainable construction, research can extend its reach to policy
recommendations that encourage and enforce circular practices. By developing
frameworks that align regulatory environments with circular economy principles,
researchers contribute to SDG 17 (Partnerships for the Goals) by fostering collab-
orations between governments, industries, and communities to achieve sustainable
outcomes (Júnior et al. 2023).
The establishment of green certiﬁcation systems and standards for circular
constructionpracticesisanotherareawheresustainableresearchcanmakesubstantial
contributions. By setting industry benchmarks and promoting adherence to sustain-
able principles, these efforts align with SDG 12, endorsing responsible consumption
and production (Doan et al. 2019).
Renewable energy integration within construction projects stands as a notable
avenue for sustainable research. By exploring ways to incorporate renewable energy
sources, such as solar or wind power, researchers can contribute to SDG 7 (Afford-
able and Clean Energy), ensuring the overall sustainability of construction projects.
Conservation efforts can extend beyond construction materials to encompass biodi-
versity preservation in and around construction sites. Sustainable research can
explore landscaping practices that support local ecosystems, contributing to SDG 15
(Life on Land) by promoting biodiversity conservation (Pietrosemoli and Monroy
2013).
Finally, social impact assessments can be a valuable component of sustainable
research. Investigating the effects of circular construction practices on local commu-
nities, including factors such as job creation, community well-being, and social
equity, aligns with SDG 8 (Decent Work and Economic Growth) and SDG 11,
ensuring that the social dimensions of sustainability are thoroughly considered (Silva
et al. 2021).
In summary, by addressing these diverse avenues of sustainable research, the
construction industry can effectively contribute to the realization of the United
Nations’ 11 Sustainable Development Goals, fostering a more circular and sustain-
able approach to construction practices.
Circular Economy Adoption in Construction: A Pathway to Sustainable …
217
3
Circular Economy
Circular economy is a system of production and consumption that prioritizes the
use of resources in a closed loop, minimizing waste and maximizing efﬁciency. It is
an alternative to the traditional linear economy, which follows a take-make-dispose
approach, where resources are extracted, used once, and then discarded. In contrast,
the circular economy aims to keep resources in use for as long as possible, whether
through reuse, repair, or recycling (Huovila et al. 2019).
The circular economy has become increasingly popular in recent years due
to concerns about resource depletion, waste generation, and climate change. By
adopting the principles of the circular economy, businesses and industries can reduce
their environmental impact, conserve resources, and cut costs. The circular economy
can also create new economic opportunities and generate new revenue streams by
reusing and recycling materials (Brandão et al. 2020).
The circular economy is built on various key principles; Eliminate Waste and
Pollution, This entails designing products and processes that minimize waste gener-
ation and pollution throughout their lifecycles. Strategies include eco-design, cleaner
production technologies, and closed-loop manufacturing. Keep Products and Mate-
rials in Use, This involves extending the lifespan of products through repair,
reuse, remanufacturing, and recycling. Examples include product-service systems,
extended producer responsibility, and deposit-refund schemes. Regenerate Natural
Systems: This principle emphasizes protecting and restoring natural resources,
such as forests, water, and air. This includes practices like sustainable agriculture,
renewable energy generation, and biodiversity conservation (Polzer et al. 2016).
These principles require a systemic shift in how we produce and consume
goods and services and involve collaboration between businesses, governments, and
consumers (Silva et al. 2021).
The transition to a circular economy presents a myriad of beneﬁts across envi-
ronmental, economic, and social dimensions. From an environmental standpoint,
embracing a circular economy model leads to a signiﬁcant reduction in greenhouse
gas emissions. Moreover, this transition plays a crucial role in curbing resource
depletion, as it minimizes pollution and waste. The approach also contributes to the
conservation of biodiversity and enhances air and water quality (Silva et al. 2021).
On the economic front, the circular economy fosters increased resource efﬁ-
ciency and productivity. This shift in economic paradigms also sparks the creation
of new jobs and businesses, cultivating a dynamic and sustainable employment
landscape. Additionally, the circular economy mitigates reliance on imported
resources, promoting self-sufﬁciency and contributing to overall economic growth
and development (Huovila et al. 2019).
From a social perspective, the advantages are equally compelling. The circular
economy positively impacts public health and well-being by mitigating the adverse
effects of environmental degradation. Moreover, it ensures increased access to
resources, fostering a more equitable distribution of beneﬁts. As a result, the circular
218
R. Brandão and L. Verissimo
economy contributes to the reduction of social inequality and the development of
more resilient communities (Nadazdi et al. 2022).
In essence, the circular economy represents a new way of thinking about resource
management and sustainability. It offers a vision of a more efﬁcient and regenerative
economy where resources are valued and used intelligently, and waste is minimized.
Implementing the circular economy necessitates a comprehensive strategy
involving diverse stakeholders. Governments can play a pivotal role in this tran-
sition by establishing policy and regulatory frameworks that incentivize circular
practices. This includes implementing eco-taxes, extended producer responsibility
regulations, and public procurement policies that favor circular products and services
(Iyer-Raniga et al. 2023).
At the corporate level, companies must embrace circular business models, such as
product-as-a-service, leasing, and pay-per-use. Shifting the focus from product sales
to resource utilization and value retention is essential for fostering sustainability.
Technological advancements are critical in developing efﬁcient and cost-effective
solutions for resource recovery, remanufacturing, and recycling. Consumer behavior
plays a pivotal role, and empowering individuals to make informed choices is crucial.
Encouraging sustainable consumption patterns, such as selecting durable products,
participating in reuse and repair initiatives, and supporting businesses committed to
circular practices (Veleva and Bodkin 2018). Furthermore, effective collaboration
between governments, businesses, research institutions, and civil society organiza-
tions is essential for creating an environment conducive to the circular economy.
This collaborative effort, as highlighted by (Abadi et al. 2023), promotes shared
responsibility and a holistic approach.
Despite the signiﬁcant potential of the circular economy, there are challenges
that must be addressed for successful implementation. Existing economic and regu-
latory frameworks often favor the linear economy, creating systemic barriers that
hinder circular businesses. Additionally, technological gaps persist, requiring further
advancements to enhance the efﬁciency and cost-effectiveness of circular technolo-
gies. Overcoming challenges related to consumer awareness and behavior is crucial,
as lack of awareness and resistance to behavioral change can impede the transition to
circular consumption patterns. Access to ﬁnance for circular businesses and infras-
tructure development poses another signiﬁcant barrier that must be addressed for the
circular economy to ﬂourish (Abdul-Hamid et al. 2020).
4
The Construction Industry
The civil construction industry is a broad sector that encompasses a range of activi-
ties involved in the design, planning, construction, and maintenance of buildings and
infrastructure. It is a critical sector that contributes to economic growth and devel-
opment, providing employment opportunities and creating the built environment in
which we live and work (Brandão et al. 2020).
Circular Economy Adoption in Construction: A Pathway to Sustainable …
219
The construction industry is diverse, ranging from small residential renovations
to large infrastructure projects, and involves a variety of professions, including archi-
tects, engineers, contractors, and specialized professionals. The industry is a signif-
icant contributor to the economy, with a global market size of over $11 trillion in
2019 (Aslam, Huang, and Cui 2020).
Despite its importance, the construction industry faces signiﬁcant challenges,
including rising costs, labor shortages, and environmental concerns. The industry
is also a major contributor to greenhouse gas emissions and resource depletion,
underscoring the need for more sustainable practices (Chinda 2017).
To address these challenges, the construction industry is increasingly adopting
new technologies such as Building Information Modeling (BIM) and automation to
enhance efﬁciency and reduce costs. The industry is also exploring more sustainable
and circular approaches to construction, such as the use of renewable materials and
the adoption of circular economy principles (Ghaffar, Burman, and Braimah 2020).
5
Construction Waste
Construction waste refers to the by-products generated during the construction, reno-
vation, demolition, and dismantling of buildings and infrastructure. The amount of
construction waste generated is signiﬁcant, representing up to 40% of the total waste
generated in many countries (De Lima 2021).
Constructionwasteincludesavarietyofmaterials,includingconcrete,wood,steel,
brick, insulation, among others. These waste materials can be hazardous, containing
substances such as asbestos, lead, and mercury, which can have negative impacts
on health and the environment if not handled and disposed of properly (Poon et al.
2001).
Improper handling and disposal of construction waste can also contribute to envi-
ronmental issues such as soil and water pollution, as well as greenhouse gas emis-
sions. In contrast, proper management and disposal of construction waste can help
reduce the negative environmental impacts of the construction industry and conserve
resources (Brandão, Edwards, et al. 2021a, b).
To address the issue of construction waste, many countries and organizations
have implemented waste management strategies such as reduction, reuse, and recy-
cling. This includes the adoption of circular economy principles, which aim to keep
materials and products in use for as long as possible, minimizing waste generation
(Gálvez-Martos et al. 2018).
Overall, the management of construction waste is a crucial aspect of sustain-
able construction, as it can help mitigate the negative environmental impacts of the
construction industry and contribute to resource conservation.
220
R. Brandão and L. Verissimo
6
United Nations Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 11:
Sustainable Cities and Communities
TheSDG11aimstomakecitiesandhumansettlementsmoreinclusive,safe,resilient,
and sustainable. The civil construction industry plays a crucial role in achieving this
goal as it is responsible for the construction and maintenance of the infrastructure
and housing that form the foundation of urban and rural communities.
The adoption of circular economy principles in the civil construction industry can
contribute to the attainment of SDG 11 through:
1. Reduction of Waste and Promotion of Resource Efﬁciency:
The civil construction industry generates a signiﬁcant amount of waste, much of
which can be avoided through the application of circular economy principles. By
reusing materials and designing for disassembly, the industry can reduce the amount
of waste generated and promote more efﬁcient use of resources. For example, the
use of recycled concrete can reduce the carbon footprint of construction projects and
improve air quality in surrounding areas. By reusing materials and reducing waste,
the civil construction industry can also decrease the demand for virgin materials and
the associated environmental impacts, such as deforestation, soil degradation, and
water pollution (Noll et al. 2019).
2. Promotion of More Sustainable and Healthy Built Environments:
The use of recycled and reclaimed materials, as well as the application of lean
construction principles, can lead to more sustainable and healthy built environments.
For instance, the use of recycled wood can decrease the demand for virgin timber and
the associated environmental impacts, such as deforestation and habitat destruction.
Similarly, the use of recycled steel can reduce the energy needed to produce new steel
and the associated greenhouse gas emissions. The application of lean construction
principles, such as just-in-time material delivery and waste reduction, can also lead
to more efﬁcient and sustainable construction practices. By reducing the amount
by reducing the time and resources required to complete a construction project, the
industry can decrease its environmental impact and enhance efﬁciency (Huovila et al.
2019).
3. Adoption of Circular Economy Principles in the Civil Construction Industry:
The adoption of circular economy principles in the civil construction industry
can create new economic opportunities, such as the development of recycling tech-
nologies and waste management, and promote more equitable access to housing and
affordable infrastructure. By fostering more sustainable and inclusive built environ-
ments, the industry can contribute to the achievement of SDG 11, which aims to
make cities and human settlements more inclusive, safe, resilient, and sustainable.
For example, the use of recycled materials in affordable housing projects can reduce
construction costs and increase access to affordable housing. Similarly, the applica-
tion of circular economy principles in infrastructure projects can enhance access to
Circular Economy Adoption in Construction: A Pathway to Sustainable …
221
basic services such as water and sanitation, promoting more equitable development
(Ruiz et al. 2020).
7
Methods
The exploratory study embarked on a literature research within databases of scien-
tiﬁc references to elucidate insights pertinent to the chosen topic (Creswell 2012).
The research mechanism was set up with the following search strings in the in
article’s title, abstract and keywords ((“reverse logistics” OR “circular economy”)
AND (“construction industry” OR “AEC industry” OR “building industry” OR “con-
struction sector” OR “construction and demolition waste” OR “construction waste”)
AND (“construction and demolition waste,” OR “construction waste”)).
A search was performed across three internationally recognized scientiﬁc
databases,Scopus,ScienceDirectandWebofScience.Thesedatabaseswereselected
based on their extensive coverage of multidisciplinary scholarly literature, providing
a robust foundation for comprehensive exploration.
The execution of the search strategy across the identiﬁed databases was conducted
with precision, aiming to retrieve a diverse range of articles, publications, and
academicpapersrelevanttotheresearchtopic.Eachsearchresultunderwentthorough
scrutiny, beginning with the review of titles and abstracts to assess their alignment
with the research objectives. The culmination of the exploratory study involved a
comprehensive analysis and interpretation of the synthesized data, aiming to derive
meaningful insights and implications (Creswell 2018).
8
Drivers of the Circular Economy in the Civil
Construction Industry
The drivers of the circular economy in the construction industry are multifaceted and
encompass a variety of economic, environmental, and social factors (Brandão et al.
2020).
One of the main drivers is the need to reduce the environmental impact of the
construction industry. Construction signiﬁcantly contributes to greenhouse gas emis-
sionsandresourcescarcity,andthereisagrowingawarenessoftheneedtoadoptmore
sustainablepractices. Byembracingcircular economyprinciples suchas wastereduc-
tion, material reuse, and recycling, the construction industry can diminish its envi-
ronmental footprint and contribute to a more sustainable future (Kucukvar, Egilmez,
and Tatari 2014).
Another driver is the economic beneﬁts of the circular economy. By adopting
circular economy principles, the construction industry can cut costs, increase efﬁ-
ciency, and create new revenue streams. For instance, through the reuse and recycling
222
R. Brandão and L. Verissimo
of materials, companies can save on raw material costs and disposal fees. Addition-
ally, the circular economy can generate new business opportunities, such as the
development of innovative recycling technologies and waste management solutions.
Embracing a circular economy approach can help reduce costs by minimizing waste
production and the need for new materials, especially beneﬁcial in the long term as
resources become scarcer and more expensive (Hoo, Hashim, and Ho 2020).
Finally, the social beneﬁts of the circular economy also drive its adoption. By
embracing circular economy principles, the construction industry can create more
sustainable and healthy built environments, promoting the well-being of occupants
and communities. This approach can also foster more equitable and inclusive oppor-
tunities, such as the development of affordable housing and the creation of jobs in
sustainable construction (Brandão, Edwards, et al. 2021a, b).
Resource scarcity is another driver of the circular economy in the construction
industry. Construction heavily relies on ﬁnite resources like raw materials and energy.
As these resources become scarcer, it becomes increasingly important for the industry
to adopt a circular economy approach to resource management (Hoo et al. 2020).
Emerging technologies are facilitating the transition to a circular construction
industry. From digital twins and building information modeling (BIM) to artiﬁcial
intelligence and advanced materials, these technologies are enabling design for disas-
sembly, optimizing material use, and improving waste management (Oraee et al.
2017). Consumers are increasingly demanding sustainable products and services,
including those related to construction. This growing demand creates a market for
circular construction solutions that offer environmental beneﬁts alongside economic
value (Bickel et al. 2020).
Collaboration and partnerships: Successful implementation of CE in the civil
construction industry requires collaboration between stakeholders across the entire
supply chain. This includes designers, contractors, manufacturers, waste manage-
ment companies, policymakers, and researchers. Initiatives like the Global Alliance
for Circular Economy in Construction are fostering cross-sector collaboration and
knowledge exchange to accelerate the transition to a circular construction economy
(Brandão et al. 2020).
Lastly, regulatory pressure is also a driving force behind the circular economy
in the construction industry. Governments and regulatory bodies are increasingly
pushing for more sustainable practices in the construction industry, including the
adoption of circular economy principles (Brandão et al. 2020).
Overall, the drivers of the circular economy in the construction industry are
complex and multifaceted, encompassing economic, environmental, and social
factors. By recognizing these drivers and working to adopt circular economy
principles, the construction industry can contribute to a more sustainable future.
Circular Economy Adoption in Construction: A Pathway to Sustainable …
223
9
Challenges of Circular Economy in the Construction
Industry
Despite the potential beneﬁts of the circular economy in the construction industry,
there are several challenges that can hinder its adoption and implementation. One of
the main challenges is the lack of awareness and understanding of circular economy
principles among industry stakeholders. This can lead to a lack of knowledge on how
to implement circular practices and a preference for traditional linear approaches in
construction. Additionally, resistance to change may arise due to a lack of incentive
to alter established practices and invest in new technologies (Brandão et al. 2020).
Another signiﬁcant barrier is the difﬁculty in tracking and tracing materials and
products throughout their lifecycle. This is crucial for the circular economy, but
the complexity of construction supply chains can make it challenging to implement
circular practices effectively. This includes issues related to the quality and safety
of recycled materials and the difﬁculty of implementing circular practices across
various types and scales of projects (Brandão, Edwards, et al. 2021a, b).
Furthermore, the initial costs of implementing circular practices can be a signif-
icant barrier for many construction companies. This involves investments in new
technologies and the retraining of the workforce, which can be a substantial ﬁnancial
burden for smaller companies (Werning and Spinler 2020).
Finally, regulatory barriers, such as local or national regulations that do not
encourage or prioritize the adoption of circular practices in construction, can also
pose a challenge (Ghisellini et al. 2018).
Overall, the challenges to the adoption of the circular economy in the construc-
tion industry are complex and varied, requiring industry stakeholders to work
collaboratively to address these issues and create a more sustainable future.
10
The Way Forward
Overcoming the challenges associated with the Circular Economy in the construc-
tion industry demands a multifaceted and concerted effort. The ﬁrst critical step
involves the establishment and implementation of standardized testing protocols
tailored speciﬁcally to recycled and repurposed construction materials. These proto-
cols must address the inherent variability in source materials, diverse processing
methods, and potential contaminants. Through such standardization, the industry can
ensure a consistent and high-quality supply of materials, thereby mitigating concerns
related to structural integrity and safety in the construction process (Martins et al.
2022).
Technological advancements play a pivotal role in surmounting these chal-
lenges. Investing in research and development initiatives focused on non-destructive
testing methods and real-time monitoring technologies can signiﬁcantly enhance the
industry’s capability to monitor and guarantee the quality of construction materials
224
R. Brandão and L. Verissimo
throughout the entirety of a project’s lifecycle. Such innovations not only contribute
to more effective quality assurance but also enable a more dynamic and responsive
approach to managing materials in circular construction practices (Sobotka and Czaja
2015).
In the Project Design stage, several Circular Economy practices have been
employed within the construction industry to promote sustainability and resource
efﬁciency. Firstly, there’s a focus on the design and implementation of modular
buildings, which streamline construction processes and facilitate easier disassembly
and reassembly, thereby reducing waste and promoting material reuse. Additionally,
there’s an emphasis on designing buildings with adaptability in mind, allowing for
future modiﬁcations and repurposing to accommodate changing needs and func-
tions. Furthermore, strategies for designing buildings for disassembly are integrated,
ensuring that materials can be efﬁciently recovered and reused at the end of a
building’s lifecycle (Benachio et al. 2020).
Moreover, companies are adopting tools such as scales to assess the level
of Circular Economy practices implemented within their operations, promoting
accountability and continuous improvement. Additionally, simulations within
Building Information Modeling (BIM) software are utilized to analyze the reuse
potential of materials across various design scenarios, enabling informed decision-
making early in the project lifecycle. Life-cycle analysis techniques are employed to
evaluate the environmental beneﬁts of reusing different types of materials, guiding
design choices towards more sustainable outcomes. Furthermore, material stock data
isleveragedtofacilitatethereuseofmaterialsinnewconstructionprojects,promoting
resource conservation and reducing the demand for virgin materials (Hossain et al.
2020).
At the End of Life stage within the construction industry’s life cycle, various
Circular Economy practices are employed to enhance sustainability and resource
efﬁciency. Firstly, there’s an emphasis on analyzing the potential for reusing or recy-
cling existing materials, evaluating their feasibility compared to using new materials.
This process involves careful management of demolition waste, ensuring that mate-
rials are properly sorted and processed for reuse or recycling, thereby minimizing
landﬁll disposal and reducing environmental impact (Guerra et al. 2021).
Furthermore, circularity tools are utilized to assess existing buildings and provide
optimal solutions for refurbishment. These tools enable comprehensive evaluations
of building components and systems, identifying opportunities for repair, renova-
tion, and material reuse to extend the lifespan of structures and minimize resource
consumption. Additionally, the deconstruction of building structures and parts is
conducted systematically, with a focus on salvaging materials for reuse or recy-
cling. By dismantling buildings in a methodical manner, valuable materials can be
recovered and repurposed, contributing to a more circular and sustainable construc-
tion industry. Overall, these Circular Economy practices at the End of Life stage
underscore the industry’s commitment to sustainable practices and the responsible
management of resources throughout the building lifecycle (Charef et al. 2021).
Collaboration emerges as a cornerstone in overcoming the hurdles associated with
circularity in construction. Establishing a collaborative framework among industry
Circular Economy Adoption in Construction: A Pathway to Sustainable …
225
stakeholders, including manufacturers, suppliers, regulatory bodies, and construction
professionals, is imperative. Such collaboration fosters knowledge sharing, promotes
the adoption of best practices, and facilitates the development of industry-wide
standards. By collectively addressing challenges and aligning efforts, stakeholders
can instill conﬁdence in the quality of circular construction materials, laying the
groundwork for widespread adoption of circular practices (Brandao et al. 2023).
A fundamental shift in design thinking within the construction industry is crucial
for embracing circularity. Advocacy for modular and adaptable design principles,
where structures are conceived with disassembly and material recovery in mind, is
paramount. Architects and engineers must prioritize not only the functionality and
aesthetics of a structure but also the ease with which its components can be disman-
tled, repurposed, or recycled. This paradigm shift ensures that circular principles are
embedded in the very design and architecture of buildings, fostering sustainability
from the ground up (Melo et al. 2021).
Education and training programs play a pivotal role in equipping professionals in
the construction industry with the knowledge and skills required for navigating the
complexities of circular construction materials. Architects, engineers, and construc-
tion workers need to be well-versed in understanding how different materials behave
in recycled forms and be adept at addressing potential challenges associated with
their use. Comprehensive education programs contribute to building a workforce
that is not only skilled in traditional construction practices but is also proﬁcient in
the intricacies of circular construction (Opoku and Guthrie 2018).
Transparent communication is another linchpin in overcoming challenges associ-
ated with circularity in construction. There is a need to educate clients, investors, and
end-users about the beneﬁts and challenges of using recycled materials. Clearly artic-
ulating the quality assurance processes in place, the environmental impact of circular
practices, and the long-term beneﬁts of embracing the circular economy in construc-
tion is essential. Transparent communication fosters trust and understanding, crucial
components for wider acceptance and support for circular construction practices
(Wolff et al. 2020).
Innovation in material science is a critical avenue for addressing the material
complexity and quality assurance barrier. Research and development initiatives
focused on material science can lead to the creation of new materials or enhancements
to existing ones speciﬁcally tailored for circular construction. Developing recycled
materials with consistent quality and performance becomes instrumental in allaying
concerns regarding variability and safety in construction projects (Melo et al. 2021).
Moreover, advocating for regulatory support and incentives becomes integral
to facilitating the adoption of circular practices in construction. Governments can
play a pivotal role by incentivizing the use of recycled materials through policies,
tax breaks, or grants. Aligning regulations with circular economy goals not only
provides a supportive framework but also addresses ﬁnancial barriers, encouraging
the construction industry to embrace sustainable practices (Iyer-Raniga et al. 2023).
Enhanced integration within the construction supply chain is another key strategy
for overcoming challenges. Encouraging seamless collaboration among suppliers,
manufacturers, contractors, and waste management entities ensures that materials
226
R. Brandão and L. Verissimo
are sourced, used, and recycled in a coordinated manner. This integrated approach
reduces inefﬁciencies, promotes circularity, and fosters a more sustainable and
resilient construction ecosystem (Nunes et al. 2023).
Furthermore, integrating life-cycle assessments into construction projects
becomes imperative. This involves evaluating the environmental impact of materials
and processes throughout the entire life cycle of a building, from material extraction
to end-of-life disposal. By considering the broader ecological footprint, construction
professionals can make more informed decisions that prioritize sustainability and
circularity (Backes and Traverso 2022).
Public awareness campaigns serve as a vital component in the broader strategy of
overcoming challenges in the circular economy within the construction industry.
Educating the general population about the importance of circular practices in
construction not only builds public support but also creates a demand for sustain-
able construction methods and materials. This, in turn, inﬂuences industry practices,
encouragesfurtherinnovation,andestablishesasocietalfoundationforthesuccessful
implementation of circular principles in construction (Abdul-Hamid et al. 2020).
In conclusion, overcoming the challenges associated with the Circular Economy
intheconstructionindustrynecessitates acomprehensiveandcollaborativeapproach.
From standardized testing protocols and technological advancements to collaborative
stakeholder engagement and public awareness campaigns, each facet plays a crucial
role in paving the way for a more sustainable and circular construction industry.
11
Conclusions
The principles of the circular economy have the potential to transform the construc-
tion industry by reducing waste, reusing materials, and promoting more sustainable
and healthy built environments. The adoption of these principles can contribute to
achieving UN Sustainable Development Goal 11 (SDG 11), fostering more sustain-
able and inclusive cities and communities. However, there are various barriers to
the adoption of the circular economy in the construction industry, highlighting the
need for increased education and awareness, investment in new technologies, and
supportive regulatory frameworks.
The pursuit of sustainability within the construction industry is intricately linked
with the broader agenda of sustainable development, as encapsulated in the United
Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). SDG 11: Sustainable Cities and
Communities emphasizes the need for inclusive, safe, resilient, and sustainable urban
environments. By embracing circular economy principles, the construction industry
can contribute to achieving SDG 11s objectives by creating more sustainable and
livable cities. From green building design and energy-efﬁcient infrastructure to
affordable housing and inclusive urban planning, sustainable construction practices
play a pivotal role in shaping the cities of the future.
By embracing a circular economy approach, the construction industry can
decrease waste production, conserve resources, and lessen its environmental impact.
Circular Economy Adoption in Construction: A Pathway to Sustainable …
227
Several factors are driving the adoption of the circular economy in the construction
industry, including environmental concerns, resource scarcity, cost savings, and regu-
latory pressure. Overall, the circular economy presents signiﬁcant opportunities for
the construction industry to become more sustainable and reduce its environmental
footprint.
Future research in this ﬁeld may focus on several key areas to further advance the
adoption of circular economy principles in the construction industry and effectively
achieve the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). There is a need
for research addressing awareness and education regarding circular economy princi-
ples within the construction industry. This entails developing training and educational
programs targeting engineers, architects, builders, and other industry professionals,
elucidating the environmental and economic beneﬁts of embracing circular practices.
Additionally, technological advancements are required to enhance the traceability
and monitoring of materials throughout their lifecycle. This may entail the develop-
ment of blockchain-based tracking systems or other innovative technologies enabling
transparent and precise insights into the origin, usage, and ultimate disposition of
construction materials. Another pivotal point is the necessity to investigate and
develop circular business models speciﬁc to the construction sector. This involves
crafting ﬁnancial and economic incentives that promote the reuse, recycling, and
remanufacturing of construction materials, as well as fostering partnerships among
enterprises, governments, and civil society organizations to drive innovation and
collaboration.
Lastly, it is imperative to continue advocating for favorable policies and regula-
tions that incentivize and support the adoption of circular economy principles in the
construction industry. This may entail the development of international guidelines
and standards, as well as ﬁscal incentives and subsidies for companies embracing
circular practices. Ultimately, future research should concentrate on developing
holistic and integrated solutions addressing the multifaceted challenges of circular
economy adoption in construction, thereby fostering more inclusive, safe, resilient,
and sustainable cities and communities.
References
Abadi M, Huang J, Yeow J, Mohandes SR, Zhang L (2023) Towards a complex push-to-pull
dynamics in circular construction supply chains: a systematic literature review. Eng Constr
Archit Manag. https://doi.org/10.1108/ECAM-03-2023-0294
Abdul-Hamid A-Q, Ali MH, Tseng M-L, Lan S, Kumar M (2020) Impeding challenges on industry
4.0 in circular economy: palm oil industry in Malaysia. Comput Oper Res 123. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cor.2020.105052
Arora M, Raspall F, Cheah L, Silva A (2020) Buildings and the circular economy: estimating urban
mining, recovery and reuse potential of building components. Resour, Conserv Recycl 154(June
2019):104581. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.104581
Aslam MS, Huang B, Cui L (2020) Review of construction and demolition waste management in
China and USA. J Environ Manage 264(February):110445. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.
2020.110445
228
R. Brandão and L. Verissimo
Backes JG, Traverso M (2022) Life cycle sustainability assessment as a metrics towards SDGs
agenda 2030. Curr Opin Green Sustain Chem 100683
Baldassarre B, Keskin D, Diehl JC, Bocken N, Calabretta G (2020) Implementing sustainable design
theory in business practice: a call to action. J Clean Prod 273:123113. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jclepro.2020.123113
Barbosa Júnior ID, Macêdo AN, Martins VW (2023) Construction industry and its contributions to
achieving the SDGs proposed by the UN: an analysis of sustainable practices. Buildings 13(5).
https://doi.org/10.3390/buildings13051168
Benachio GL, Freitas MD, Tavares SF (2020) Circular economy in the construction industry: a
systematic literature review. J Clean Prod 260:121046. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.
121046
Bickel MW, Caniglia G, Weiser A, Lang DJ, Schomerus T (2020) Multilevel knowledge manage-
ment for municipal climate action: lessons from evaluating the operational situation of climate
action managers in the German federal state of lower Saxony. J Clean Prod 277:123628. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.123628
Brandao R, Edwards DJ, Melo ACS, Macedo AN (2023) Reverse supply chain practices for
construction and demolition waste in the Brazilian amazon: a multi-stakeholder view. J Mater
Cycles Waste Manage 0123456789. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10163-023-01680-1
Brandão R, Ang S, Braga AE (2020) Partnership-oriented reverse supply chain toward construction
and demolition waste recycling. In: Encyclopedia of the UN sustainable development goals.
Springer Nature, Switzerland. pp 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-71067-9_130-1
Brandão R, Edwards DJ, Hosseini MR, Silva Melo AC, Macêdo AN (2021) Reverse supply chain
conceptual model for construction and demolition waste. Waste Manag Res. https://doi.org/10.
1177/0734242X21998730
Brandão R, Hosseini MR, Macêdo AN, Melo AC, Martek I (2021) Public administration strategies
that stimulate reverse logistics within the construction industry: a conceptual typology. Eng,
Constr Arch Manag ahead-of-p (ahead-of-print). https://doi.org/10.1108/ecam-07-2020-0547
CalvoN,Varela-CandamioL,Novo-CortiI(2014)Adynamicmodelforconstructionanddemolition
(C&D) waste management in Spain: driving policies based on economic incentives and tax
penalties. Sustainability (switzerland) 6(1):416–435. https://doi.org/10.3390/su6010416
Charef R, Morel JC, Rakhshan K (2021) Barriers to implementing the circular economy in the
construction industry: a critical review. Sustainability 13(23). https://doi.org/10.3390/su1323
12989
Chinda T (2017) Examination of factors inﬂuencing the successful implementation of reverse logis-
tics in the construction industry: pilot study. Procedia Eng 182:99–105. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.proeng.2017.03.128
Creswell (2018) Research design: qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods approaches, 5th edn.
SAGE Publications, London
Creswell JW (2012) Educational research: planning, conducting, and evaluating quantitative and
qualitative research, 4th edn. Pearson Prentice Hall, Boston
Doan DT, Ghaffarianhoseini A, Naismith N, Ghaffarianhoseini A, Zhang T, Tookey J (2019) Exam-
ining green star certiﬁcation uptake and its relationship with building information modelling
(BIM) adoption in New Zealand. J Environ Manag 250 (September). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jenvman.2019.109508
Gálvez-Martos JL, Styles D, Schoenberger H, Zeschmar-Lahl B (2018) Construction and demolition
waste best management practice in Europe. Resour Conserv Recycl 136(April):166–178. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2018.04.016
Ghaffar SH, Burman M, Braimah N (2020) Pathways to circular construction: an integrated manage-
ment of construction and demolition waste for resource recovery. J Clean Prod 244:118710.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.118710
Ghisellini P, Xi J, Liu G, Ulgiati S (2018) Evaluating the transition towards cleaner production in
the construction and demolition sector of China: a review. J Clean Prod 195:418–434. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.05.084
Circular Economy Adoption in Construction: A Pathway to Sustainable …
229
Guerra BC, Shahi S, Mollaei A, Skaf N, Weber O, Leite F, Haas C (2021) Circular economy
applications in the construction industry: a global scan of trends and opportunities. J Clean Prod
324:129125. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.129125
Hoo PY, Hashim H, Ho WS (2020) Towards circular economy: economic feasibility of waste to
Biomethane injection through proposed feed-in tariff. J Clean Prod 270. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jclepro.2020.122160
Hossain MU, Ng ST, Antwi-Afari P, Amor B (2020) Circular economy and the construction industry:
existing trends, challenges and prospective framework for sustainable construction. Renew
Sustain Energy Rev 130(October 2019):109948. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2020.109948
Huovila P, Iyer-Raniga U, Maity S (2019) Circular Economy in the built environment: supporting
emerging concepts. IOP Conf Ser: Earth Environ Sci 297(1). https://doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/
297/1/012003
Iyer-Raniga U, Gajanayake A, Ho O-K (2023) The transition to a circular built environment in
Australia: an analysis of the jurisdictional policy framework. Environ Policy Law 53:233–246.
https://doi.org/10.3233/EPL-220073
Kucukvar M, Egilmez G, Tatari O (2014) Evaluating environmental impacts of alternative construc-
tionwastemanagementapproachesusingsupply-chain-linkedlife-cycleanalysis.WasteManage
Res 32(6):500–508. https://doi.org/10.1177/0734242X14536457
Lim CH, Loh YW, Foo DCY, Ng WPQ, Lam HL (2021) Circular economy and industry 4.0 tech-
nology integration framework for the oil palm industry. Chem Eng Trans 88. https://doi.org/10.
3303/CET2188211
de Lima RB (2021) Proposta de Canal Reverso Para Resíduos de Construção e Demolição Baseado
Nas Melhores Práticas, Na Legislação e No Contexto Do Município de Belém. Universidade
Federal do Pará. www.editora.ufsc.br
dos Santos Lobato F, Melo AC, Junior AE, de Lucena Nunes DR, Nagata VD, de Lima RB, Martins
VW (2024) Reverse logistics of construction and demolition waste: a bibliometric analysis of
the literature and perspectives for future research logística reversa de resíduos de construção e
demolição: uma análise bibliométrica da literatura e perspectivas para P. Revista de Gestão e
Secretariado 15(4):1–20. https://doi.org/10.7769/gesec.v15i4.3660. Reverse
Ruiz L, Alberto L, Ramón XR, Domingo SG (2020) The circular economy in the construction and
demolition waste sector—a review and an integrative model approach. J Clean Prod 248. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.119238
Martins VW, Nunes DR, Melo AC, Brandão R, Braga Júnior AE, Nagata VD (2022) Analysis of
the activities that make up the reverse logistics processes and their importance for the future
of logistics networks: an exploratory study using the TOPSIS technique. Logistics 6(3). https://
doi.org/10.3390/logistics6030060
Melo ACS, Braga AE, Leite CDP, Bastos LSL, Nunes DRL (2021) Frameworks for reverse logistics
and sustainable design integration under a sustainability perspective: a systematic literature
review. Res Eng Design 32(2):225–243. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00163-020-00351-8
Nadazdi A, Naunovic Z, Ivanisevic N (2022) Circular economy in construction and demolition
wastemanagementinthewesternBalkans:asustainabilityassessmentframework.Sustainability
14(2):871. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14020871
Noll D, Wiedenhofer D, Miatto A, Singh SJ (2019) The expansion of the built environment, waste
generation and eu recycling targets on samothraki, greece: an island’s dilemma. Resour Conserv
Recycl 150(2019):104405. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.104405
Nunes DR, Nascimento DD, Matos JR, Melo AC, Martins VW, Braga AE (2023) Approaches to
performance assessment in reverse supply chains: a systematic literature review. Logistics 7(3).
https://doi.org/10.3390/logistics7030036
Silva O, Douglas W, Morais DC (2021) Transitioning to a circular economy in developing countries:
a collaborative approach for sharing responsibilities in solid waste management of a Brazilian
craft brewery. J Clean Prod 319. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.128703
Opoku A, Guthrie P (2018) Education for sustainable development in the built environment. Int J
Constr Educ Res Taylor & Francis
230
R. Brandão and L. Verissimo
Oraee M, Reza Hosseini M, Papadonikolaki E, Palliyaguru R, Arashpour M (2017) Collaboration
in BIM-based construction networks: a bibliometric-qualitative literature review. Int J Project
Manage 35(7):1288–1301. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijproman.2017.07.001
Pietrosemoli L, Monroy CR (2013) The impact of sustainable construction and knowledge manage-
ment on sustainability goals: a review of the Venezuelan renewable energy sector. Renew Sustain
Energy Rev 27:683–691
Polzer VR, Pisani MAJ, Persson KM (2016) The importance of extended producer responsibility
and the national policy of solid waste in Brazil. Int J Environ Waste Manage 18(2):101–119.
https://doi.org/10.1504/IJEWM.2016.080398
Poon CS, Ann TWY, Ng LH (2001) On-site sorting of construction and demolition waste in Hong
Kong. Resour, Conserv Recycl 32(2):157–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0921-3449(01)00052-0
Sala S (2019) Life cycle assessment and evaluation of solutions towards sustainable development
goals, pp 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-71067-9_33-1
Sobotka A, Czaja J (2015) Analysis of the factors stimulating and conditioning application of
reverse logistics in construction. Procedia Eng 122(Orsdce):11–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
proeng.2015.10.002
Veleva V, Bodkin G (2018) Corporate-entrepreneur collaborations to advance a circular economy.
J Clean Prod 188:20–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.03.196
Werning JP, Spinler S (2020) Transition to circular economy on ﬁrm level: barrier identiﬁcation
and prioritization along the value chain. J Clean Prod 245:118609. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcl
epro.2019.118609
Wolff S, Brönner M, Held M, Lienkamp M (2020) Transforming automotive companies into sustain-
ability leaders: a concept for managing current challenges. J Clean Prod 276. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jclepro.2020.124179
The Use of Blockchain in Public
Administration: A Transformative Tool
for a More Sustainable Future
María Cendán Castillo and Isabel Novo Corti
Abstract The application of Blockchain technology in public administration is
emerging as a topic of growing interest in the global context. The fundamental role of
administration, focused on resource management and decision-making with social
impact, places it in a strategic position to make the world more sustainable. At the
same time, Blockchain technology is seen as an innovative tool, due to its ability
to create immutable digital records, generating increasing interest for its potential
to enhance sustainability and reduce environmental impact in the management of
public resources. The objective of this sustainability-focused research is to conduct
an in-depth analysis of the main advantages and challenges of applying Blockchain
technologies in public administration as well as its potential impact on sustainability.
To achieve this, a review of key documents and case studies related to the subject will
be conducted. The results suggest new areas of study within sustainability research,
focusing on the development of scalable solutions, longitudinal studies on environ-
mental impact, and cross-disciplinary collaboration. Focusing sustainability research
on these areas will enable Blockchain to become a truly transformative tool for a
more sustainable future.
Keywords Blockchain technology · Public administration · Sustainability ·
Efﬁcient governance · Transparency
M. C. Castillo (B) · I. N. Corti
Economic Development and Social Sustainability (EDASS), Faculty of Economics and Business,
University of A Coruña. Elviña Campus, 15008 A Coruña, Spain
e-mail: maria.cendan.castillo@udc.es
I. N. Corti
e-mail: isabel.novo.corti@udc.es
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_14
231
232
M. C. Castillo and I. N. Corti
1
Introduction: Blockchain as a Lever for Sustainability
in the Digital Strategy of the Public Sector
Digital transformation has emerged as a priority both at European and global levels
for governments with a particular focus on improving public services, protecting
citizens’ well-being and strengthening the relationship between society and govern-
ment in terms of sustainability, quality, and transparency (European Commission
2021). Within the framework of public administration (PA), the digital strategies
focuses on the need of creating a digital ecosystem (Schmidt and Krimmer 2022)
focusing on improving the efﬁciency of public services, strengthening citizen partic-
ipation, and fostering a transition to a public sector more adapted to the digital age
in pursuit of a progressively sustainable system (Lindgren et al. 2019; Catalini and
Gans 2020). With the growing awareness of climate change and the urgent need for
more social inclusion practices, PA is increasingly looking towards innovative tech-
nologies to address sustainable challenges (Elisa et al. 2023; Tavares et al. 2020). One
such technology that has caught the attention of public administrators is Blockchain
(Schletz et al. 2020). Blockchain technology (BC) has the potential to revolutionize
PA by enhancing transparency, accountability, and efﬁciency in sustainability efforts
(Jayawardhana and Colombage 2020; Aysan et al. 2021). It considered as a catalyzing
tool for a digital strategy aligned with the sustainable development goals proposed
by the Agenda 2030. Its intrinsic features, such as immutability, traceability, or
decentralization, enable the construction of new approaches in the ﬁeld of inno-
vation towards a more robust sustainability (Changwony et al. 2015; Aburumman
et al. 2020). BC can enhance governance systems within cities or smart cities by
offering more sustainable services and decentralizing trust. This can prevent manip-
ulation by central authorities, promote transparency, and ensure trust-free transac-
tions (Rana et al. 2019; Aysan et al. 2021). Research into its principal advantages
and challenges is an ongoing necessity within sustainability research that enables a
deeper exploration of the applicability of BC across various domains. Drawing from
a comprehensive review of the literature, the primary advantages and challenges
of applying BC in pursuit of a more sustainable PA are delineated. As we shall
observe, its attributes enable information tracing, heightening interaction security,
and fostering sustainability in decision-making, particularly within the framework
of public policies.
The Use of Blockchain in Public Administration: A Transformative …
233
2
The Role of Blockchain Technology in a New Sustainable
Public Governance
2.1
Main Characteristics of Blockchain Technology
In 2008, under the pseudonym Satoshi Nakamoto, the white paper introducing the
concept of Bitcoin, a decentralized payment method, was published (Nakamoto
2008). Although he does not mention the word “Blockchain”, Nakamoto introduces
the idea of interlocking blocks of data, which gives rise to the term and establishes
it as a key tool in the digital realm (Mattila 2016). BC, deﬁned as an electronic
database system, aims to record and distribute transactional data through the use
of cryptography to ensure security and direct consensus among participants (Sun
Yin et al. 2019), strengthening data protection, and reinforcing protection in the
exchange of digital data (Sansone et al. 2023). Also known as Distributed Ledger
Technology, BC is applied to facilitate the exchange of digital data between peers
without intermediaries, establishing a decentralized trust system (Ølnes et al. 2017).
Once a transaction is embedded and veriﬁed on the BC, it cannot be deleted, which
ensures an immutable record of transactions (Yfantis et al. 2021). The BC peer-to-
peer (P2P) network allows transactions with digital assets between different actors in
the system, called miners. These miners solve mathematical problems by “Proof of
Work” (PoW) to verify the transparency of the transaction and create a hash value that
connects the blocks in the chain. They are usually compensated in return in cryp-
tocurrencies (Tschorsch and Scheuermann 2016). Although efﬁcient, this process
consumes high levels of energy, which has led to the proposal of Proof of Stake
(PoS) as a more sustainable alternative.
The potential of BC to enhance sustainability is a topic of growing interest (Son-
Turan 2019). Although BC technology has found applications in various ﬁelds,
such as security, integrity, and sustainability (Sansone et al. 2023) its presumed
immutability, authenticity, and decentralized nature offer new opportunities to
enhance trust and transparency in different sectors (Secinaro et al. 2021). While
its application in the public sector is still relatively unexplored, it is seen as a driver
for transformative change, particularly in terms of networking services, data secu-
rity, and operational efﬁciency (Sousa 2023; Cagigas et al 2021). However, despite
its innovative potential, BC is still in an experimental phase (Allen et al. 2020) and
its impact should not be overestimated (Aysan et al. 2021). Ignorance of this tech-
nology generates mistrust in its applicability, and a thorough analysis of its impact in
a holistic context is suggested before assessing its beneﬁts (Bai et al. 2020; Catalini
and Gans 2020).
234
M. C. Castillo and I. N. Corti
2.2
The Application of Blockchain in Public Administration
The emergence of BC, initially linked to Bitcoin, has spawned an innovative
ecosystem that transcends the ﬁnancial sphere (Tapscott and Tapscott 2016) and
extends to diverse sectors such as agriculture and education (Swan 2015). In the ﬁeld
of PA, the implementation of BC technology stands as a tool aimed at improving
management efﬁciency, promoting increased trust, reducing corruption, and safe-
guarding transparency in processes. This adoption of BC is positioned as a crucial
lever of change for the so- called “New Public Governance”. This innovative manage-
ment approach in the PA, oriented towards a more decentralised perspective, boosts
aspects such as transparency, citizen participation, service quality and innovation
(Brinkmann 2021). In the context of BC, governance is understood as the processes
of directing, controlling, and coordinating stakeholders in a BC project (Pelt et al.
2021). As we will see, different forms of governance include the management of the
BC and its use in decision making through smart contracts and automated algorithms
(De Filippi and Loveluck 2016). A tool whose use enables the creation of digital iden-
tities (Abdul Bujang et al. 2020) facilitating interaction with public records (Maza
2019). In addition, it is effectively applied in real estate registration (Akhmetbek and
Špaček 2021), land registry (Shahaab et al. 2023) as well as in the improvement of
judicial, ﬁscal, commercial and basic service processes (Lu et al. 2020). Technology
also plays an essential role in the efﬁcient allocation of resources (Zhu 2022) among
other uses.
The application of BC in PA has triggered new lines of research focused on
assessing the characteristics necessary for its proper functioning in the public
sphere (Cagigas et al. 2022). Its essential characteristics such as traceability,
immutability, and decentralisation, as we will see, offer opportunities to transform
public management, improving transparency and efﬁciency.
3
The Impact of Blockchain on Sustainability
Concerns associated with the implementation of BC in institutions address not only
high costs or development risk, but also technical and ethical concerns, especially
in sustainability (Bai and Sarkis 2017). Although it is still in early development and
requires empirical testing to demonstrate its future scalability (Aldieri et al. 2021) BC
is presented as a lever to achieve the SDGs, especially those with an environmental
focus (Parmentola et al. 2022). A detailed exploration of the essential qualities of BC
technology opens the door to a new perspective on public management, boosting the
transparency and efﬁciency of processes. In particular, a comprehensive literature
review has been carried out in order to delineate the advantages and challenges of
this technology in the framework of PA. This review covers various academic sources
and specialised studies, with the aim of providing a comprehensive overview of the
various ways in which BC has been implemented in administrative environments. A
The Use of Blockchain in Public Administration: A Transformative …
235
structured summary of key ﬁndings is then developed, highlighting speciﬁc use cases,
identiﬁed beneﬁts and potential associated challenges. This compilation is presented
as a valuable tool for understanding and analysing the diversity of BC applications
in PA, providing a solid basis for future research and strategic decisions.
3.1
Blockchain´s Positive Impact on Sustainability in Public
Administration
In today’s digital era, the PA is facing an increasing need to adopt innovative technolo-
gies that improve efﬁciency, transparency, and security in data and process manage-
ment. The main advantages reported in the current literature regarding the application
of BC in PA are the following (Fig. 1):
Starting with traceability, as the ﬁrst outstanding advantage of the use of BC
in PA, it is revealed as a fundamental pillar to strengthen transparency and trust
in government management (Shava and Mhlanga 2023). Each transaction recorded
on the BC is meticulously veriﬁed and publicly accessible to all nodes, allowing
for detailed tracking of items from their point of origin to their ﬁnal destination
(Zhu 2022). This process not only safeguards the integrity of information along the
Advantages
Traceability
Cryptographic 
security
Process 
automation
Immutability
Governance
Innovation 
capacity
Decentralization
Fig. 1 Main advantages of BC application in PA
236
M. C. Castillo and I. N. Corti
entire journey, but also encourages greater citizen participation (Engin and Treleaven
2019) by providing citizens with the ability to clearly visualise and understand the
ﬂow of government transactions (Brinkmann 2021). The public BC is fully acces-
sible and any node could trace any transaction, presenting a high potential for data
auditability (Cagigas et al. 2022; Elisa et al. 2023; Iftekhar et al. 2021). This trans-
parency contributes to increasing the legitimacy of PA and institutional control,
creating an environment for more effective accountability, and strengthening trust in
governmental institutions (Akhmetbek and Špaček 2021). Blockchain’s traceability
capability not only enhances efﬁciency in resource management and waste preven-
tion but also contributes to product and service traceability, crucial for ensuring
sustainability in government supply chains, such as food procurement or material
management.
The impossibility of modifying the data incorporated in the chain is reﬂected in
the advantage of immutability, and translates into a solid guarantee of integrity and
authenticity (Viano et al. 2022). In the BC platform, although it is true that once
a transaction has been carried out, it is impossible to reverse it, posing a potential
barrier to adapting the use of BCs to real changes in transactions (Sharma et al. 2023).
However, this feature becomes an advantage by providing an additional level of secu-
rity, as it eliminates the possibility of malicious alterations or fraud (Shahaab et al.
2023). Historical information remains intact, supporting the integrity of transactions
and building conﬁdence in the reliability of the system. The immutability of data
in BC ensures the integrity and transparency of governmental records, essential for
regulatory compliance and accountability in implementing sustainability measures.
Traceability and immutability closely linked to governance. The possible lack of
clear leadership in the PA (Sharma et al. 2023) can be addressed through the imple-
mentation of more transparent and participatory governance structures, which foster
effective collaboration and coordination of all stakeholders (Bodó and Janssen 2022;
Zhu 2022). To this end, BC enables the establishment of a shared and secure plat-
form for data sharing, collaboration, and innovation, thus enhancing interoperability
and efﬁciency in government management (Brinkmann 2021). The introduction of
BC also provides the opportunity to address the competing interests of each party,
avoiding potential trade-offs associated with the implementation of emerging tech-
nologies (Bodó and Janssen 2022) through consensus-building and agreements that
beneﬁt all actors involved (Elisa et al. 2023). Furthermore, it can be a valuable tool
for increasing transparency and combating corruption in PA, promoting more ethical
and accountable governance (Engin and Treleaven 2019). While it is true, potential
anti-corruption use will depend on the strength of policies, infrastructure, laws, and
socio-economic factors (Adam and Fazekas 2021).
The fourth advantage we will explore is decentralisation representing a paradigm
shift in the way government data is managed, from creating a self-sovereign iden-
tity (Schulz et al. 2020). The complexity associated with inserting unauthorised
changes to the BC, due to the distribution of information across different nodes,
provides an additional layer of security and immutability of data (Bachynskyy and
Radeiko 2019). This decentralised nature not only makes it difﬁcult to manipulate
information, but also eliminates the need for intermediaries (Kuo and Shyu 2021)
The Use of Blockchain in Public Administration: A Transformative …
237
establishing an environment of institutional trust and reliability. In turn, it encourages
cooperative socio-economic interactions (Viano et al. 2022) reducing intermediate
costs (Brinkmann 2021; Elisa et al. 2023; Iftekhar et al. 2021; Glavantis 2020).
While it is true that challenges and obstacles may arise in relation to the involve-
ment of multiple nodes. The absence of a single administrator creates risks both
for the functioning of the system and for the determination of legal issues such as
the deﬁnition of jurisdiction for the resolution of disputes related to the use of BCs
(Bachynskyy and Radeiko 2019). In turn, the slower the nodes will be to validate
and agree on transactions, the greater the number of participants, including an added
difﬁculty in relation to possible negative attitudes of miners such as possible selﬁsh
behaviour (Akhmetbek and Špaček 2021). However, despite these potential difﬁcul-
ties, decentralisation is presented as an advantage as it is understood that resistance
to corruption, fraud and manipulation is strengthened by requiring the unanimous
consensus of the nodes for the incorporation of changes in the BC. The inherent
decentralisation and transparency of BC can enhance public governance by fostering
more active citizen participation in decision-making and oversight of sustainability
policies.
In turn, the implementation of cryptography not only makes information manip-
ulation more difﬁcult, but also ensures the integrity and security of data through
timestamps and cryptographic signatures on each transaction (Shahaab et al. 2023).
This feature brings multiple beneﬁts for the PA. Firstly, there is a noticeable increase
in the security of government servers, providing an additional barrier against possible
cyber-attacks (Bachynskyy and Radeiko 2019) although ensuring security is no easy
task (Maza 2019). In addition, the use of cryptography contributes to increased
privacy protection, as each transaction has a digital identiﬁcation that ensures the
conﬁdentiality of personal data (Schulz et al. 2020). Veriﬁcation of information
ownership and resistance to malicious behaviour, such as spam, are strengthened,
promoting higher data integrity and data quality (Cirillo et al. 2022). At the same
time, BC uses hash functions, Merkle trees and digital signatures to strengthen secu-
rity, which means that, overall, less than one third of nodes are successfully attacked
(Zhang et al. 2022). Blockchain’s cryptographic security strengthens trust in govern-
mental processes and data, crucial for the effective implementation of sustainability
and transparency policies in resource management.
Sixth, the automation of processes that BC enables, especially through smart
contracts, represents a signiﬁcant advance in the efﬁciency and agility of processes
in PA (Fiorentino and Bartolucci 2021). Based on smart contracts, BC can establish
automatic processing mechanisms through procedures, as well as establish govern-
mental data sharing mechanisms with clear responsibilities and control (Zhang et al.
2022). The ability to automate government processes not only reduces the need for
intermediaries, but also minimises possible errors and optimises various interactions
with the administration (Zhu 2022). This provides easier and faster access to informa-
tion, allowing transactions to be executed immediately and services to be available
24/7 (Vrabie 2023). The standardisation and streamlining of interactions with the
PA also results in a de-bureaucratisation of it (Bachynskyy and Radeiko 2019) a
reduction in operational costs and a signiﬁcant decrease in human error (Cagigas
238
M. C. Castillo and I. N. Corti
et al. 2022). Process automation through smart contracts not only improves oper-
ational efﬁciency but also can reduce resource consumption and associated costs,
thus promoting ﬁnancial and environmental sustainability in administrative activi-
ties. Improved process efﬁciency by reducing redundant constructions and applying
the principle of “submit only once” (Brinkmann 2021) contributes to the social value
and well-being of citizens by simplifying procedures and channeling information
more efﬁciently.
Finally, the integration of BC technology in the PA, from an innovation perspec-
tive, opens up a wide range of beneﬁts beyond operational efﬁciency. The introduc-
tion of BC creates an enabling environment for the development and maintenance of
innovative technologies. It facilitates a more efﬁcient dialogue between the PA, busi-
nesses and citizens, promoting collaboration and interoperability between different
governmental departments (Rukanova et al. 2023). In addition, it provides concrete
support for climate action and the mobilisation of green ﬁnance by improving moni-
toring and providing data for reporting (Schulz et al. 2020). It also stimulates social
and economic innovation by making use of this technology in the framework of Big
Data and predictive analytics for public policy development (Engin and Treleaven
2019). An example of this can be found in the aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic.
It is observed that this technology accelerates the achievement of the SDGs related
to health (SDG 3) and the reduction of inequalities (SDG 10) (Calandra et al. 2023).
The traceability provided by BC creates a health ecosystem that integrates clinical,
organisational, and managerial outcomes, reducing fraud and improving governance
(Cerchione et al. 2023).
Finally, different authors claim that the use of BC can also accelerate economic
development (Metechko and Sorokin 2023) and foster the search for new service
delivery models in the framework of innovative solutions, although their implemen-
tation is still in its infancy (Grover et al. 2019).
3.2
Evaluating Sustainability Challenges of Blockchain
in Public Administration
Although BC has attracted attention as an innovative tool with the potential to
transform PA, its implementation also poses challenges that need to be carefully
considered. Blockchain technology has the potential to transform PA by stream-
lining processes, increasing transparency, and reducing costs (Aburumman et al.
2020; Dziundziuk 2022). However, its implementation is hindered by several limi-
tations. These include security and privacy concerns, the need for changes in admin-
istrative processes, and the lack of effective governance models (Aburumman et al.
2020; Dziundziuk 2022). Furthermore, the lack of understanding of the technology’s
beneﬁts and the legal and regulatory environment also pose signiﬁcant barriers
(Dziundziuk 2022). The main challenges reported in the literature are the following
(Fig. 2):
The Use of Blockchain in Public Administration: A Transformative …
239
Challenges 
Scalability
Corruptibility 
in data 
management
High 
barriers to 
initial 
adoption
Resistance 
to change 
by interest 
groups
Difficulty in 
accessibility
Little 
regulatory 
regulation
Security 
threats
Impact on 
environmental 
sustainability
Fig. 2 Main challenges of BC application in PA
The implementation of large-scale BC requires signiﬁcant investment in infras-
tructure and training (Shahaab et al. 2023). This additional resource demand may be
prohibitive for some organisations or government entities seeking to adopt this tech-
nology on a large scale. In turn, the immaturity of BC technology also contributes
to the difﬁculty in scalability (Brinkmann 2021). This disadvantage can hinder
the widespread adoption of sustainable practices and technologies within govern-
mental operations, limiting the potential impact on resource management and envi-
ronmental conservation efforts. As this technology evolves and grows, the lack of
clear standards and mature solutions (Sharma et al. 2023) may limit its ability to efﬁ-
ciently handle large numbers of simultaneous transactions. This could lead to delays,
network congestion and affect the speed and efﬁciency of the system in high-demand
situations.
Numerous authors highlight the vulnerability of the technology to security
threats as one of the main challenges of BC. The loss of private keys on the BC plat-
form represents a threat with permanent consequences on the access to the ownership
of the corresponding blocks (Akhmetbek and Špaček 2021). In turn, in the context
of private BC, which require permissions and have a smaller number of nodes, they
may also be more vulnerable from a security point of view with the understanding
that trust in the chain increases when the number of nodes increases (Maza 2019).
The limited number of nodes may increase the risk of malicious attacks, as there
240
M. C. Castillo and I. N. Corti
are fewer checkpoints and validation points compared to larger, decentralised BCs.
Privacy leaks represent another vulnerability in BC security. Although the BC is
designed to be transparent and secure, improper exposure of sensitive information
can compromise the privacy of users and transactions (Brinkmann 2021). Moreover,
the possibility of collaborating with entities without international legitimacy adds an
additional layer of risk. The lack of clear regulations and international standards may
allow unauthorised actors to participate (Rukanova et al. 2023) which could compro-
mise the integrity and security of the platform (Maza 2019). Finally, the security of
information in BC transactions also depends on the constant updating of software
products (Metechko and Sorokin 2023). The need to keep systems up-to-date to
address potential vulnerabilities and security threats highlights the importance of
continuous security management.
A third disadvantage of the application of BC in PA centers on data manage-
ment. The presence of inaccurate or untruthful original data represents a potential
threat to the efﬁciency of the BC. Inaccuracy in the initial data can compromise
the validity and accuracy of the transactions recorded in the chain (Maza 2019).
The impossibility of verifying the validity of the will of the parties to the trans-
action adds complexity to data management in the BC (Shahaab et al. 2023). The
potential for corruptibility in data management within BC systems raises concerns
about the integrity and accuracy of government records, undermining transparency
and accountability in sustainability initiatives (Sousa 2023). The lack of effective
mechanisms to ensure the authenticity of transactions can undermine trust in the
platform (Bachynskyy and Radeiko 2019). On a second point, the lack of adequate
incentives for companies to voluntarily share their data may limit the availability of
valuable information on the BC (Shahaab et al. 2023). On a ﬁnal point in the data
management framework, the anonymity status of users on the BC, while it may be
beneﬁcial in terms of privacy, makes it difﬁcult to know their identity (Metechko and
Sorokin 2023). The challenge of aligning the identity management scheme with the
Public Key Infrastructure and Qualiﬁed Digital Certiﬁcates issued by Qualiﬁed Trust
Service Providers highlights the need for effective coordination between different
systems and standards (Turkanovic and Podgorelec 2020).
The structure of BC is complex, which can lead to difﬁcult initial adoption of BC.
Funding for widespread adoption is an initial obstacle. Lack of sufﬁcient ﬁnancial
resources may limit the government’s ability to effectively implement and scale up
BC projects (Shava and Mhlanga 2023). In this context, weak government internal
control systems may hinder the effective adoption of BC (Shava and Mhlanga 2023).
It is therefore essential to strengthen government intermediaries to ensure robust
and efﬁcient implementation. At the same time, the high costs of setting up the
BC system also represent a signiﬁcant challenge. It is necessary to have available
hardware and trusted IT infrastructures, e.g. with the guarantee that a backup key
EK (Goldsmith et al. 2022). The need for technical experts to set up and maintain
the necessary technology infrastructure can generate additional costs (Viano et al.
2022). Limited previous experience with BC implementations in PA, which are often
in pilot or proof-of-concept stages, may limit the availability of good practices and
lessons learned (Brinkmann 2021). High barriers to initial adoption, combined with
The Use of Blockchain in Public Administration: A Transformative …
241
resistance to change by interest groups, may impede the implementation of innovative
and sustainable solutions in PA, slowing progress towards achieving environmental
sustainability goals.
In relation to this we encounter a potential barrier in relation to accessibility
Internet connectivity is highlighted as a fundamental requirement for the effective
implementation of BC (Adam and Fazekas 2021). At the same time, the availability
of power supplies is another challenge, especially in regions with limited infras-
tructure. It further exacerbates inequalities in access to sustainable governance prac-
tices, potentially marginalizing certain groups from participating in decision-making
processes related to environmental conservation and resource management. Linked
to this, the need for broadband is related to the speed and efﬁciency of transactions,
making the lack of communications infrastructure an obstacle to the effective imple-
mentation of BC (Shava and Mhlanga 2023). The digital divide highlights the impor-
tance of addressing inequality in access to technology (Viano et al. 2022). Addressing
this challenge involves investments in the development of robust and reliable commu-
nication infrastructures and implementing inclusive policies and technology training
programs (Schulz et al. 2020).
Undoubtedly, the application of BC technology has a human component with the
possibility of having behaviours of resistance to change that must be taken into
account for a correct application. Lack of knowledge about BC and its applications
in PA can generate reluctance and mistrust among community members (Rukanova
et al. 2023). In particular, the lack of training in BC among public ofﬁcials and citizens
(Adam and Fazekas 2021). In turn, concerns about job cuts, the tendency to cling
to traditional continuous processes, or the perception of excessive visibility of their
work management due to traceability of BC, are examples of resistances (Cagigas
et al. 2022). However, it can be proactively addressed by reorienting and training
employees to adapt to new roles and responsibilities generated by technology.
A next disadvantage focuses on the regulatory framework. The implementation
of BC in the PA clashes with the current legislative structure, so an assessment
of its modiﬁcation is needed to adapt to new technological realities. For example,
the incompatibility of BC with the “right to be forgotten”, due to its immutable
nature, raises concerns about privacy and data security (Maza 2019). The ease of
tracing vulnerable data without the consent of the data subject highlights the need
to address these critical issues in relation to the management of personal and sensi-
tive data. On a second point, although the wallet does not present data protection
concerns by storing only the necessary data, the BC may generate conﬂicts with
data protection laws by not attributing direct responsibility to any data subject over
them (Viano et al. 2022). In this area, smart contracts present difﬁculties, such as
the expression of content using provisions that require human judgement, the depen-
dence on external sources of information and the difﬁculty in amending them once
they have been encoded (Maza 2019). The lack of regulatory regulation surrounding
BC leaves room for security threats and vulnerabilities, posing risks to the conﬁden-
tiality and integrity of sensitive governmental data, thereby undermining efforts to
ensure sustainable and responsible governance practices. These challenges highlight
242
M. C. Castillo and I. N. Corti
the need to develop regulations that address speciﬁc aspects of smart contracts and
provide a clear framework for their implementation.
Finally, the intersection between sustainability and innovation in the context of
the BC chain provides opportunities, but also signiﬁcant challenges. The associated
high energy costs, especially in public BC, raise signiﬁcant environmental concerns.
Inaddition,theyhighlightlimitedinnovativecapabilitiesforattractingcompaniesand
stakeholders to government to lead the delivery of public services through BC. The
Jevons Paradox, which suggests that improvements in efﬁciency and technology can
result in an overall increase in consumption, adds an additional layer of complexity
(Vrabie 2023). The system’s ease of use and speed of response can generate higher
demand, offsetting the savings from increased efﬁciency and creating a cycle of
increased consumption. The environmental impact of BC, particularly its energy-
intensive mining processes, raises concerns about its sustainability credentials and
its compatibility with broader environmental conservation objectives.
Despite these challenges, the successful development of blockchain-based
systems can lead to signiﬁcant cost savings and increased trust in public institutions
(Dziundziuk 2022). The identiﬁed disadvantages of BC in PA present signiﬁcant
challenges to achieving sustainability goals, necessitating careful consideration and
mitigation strategies to ensure BC can effectively support sustainable governance
practices and environmental conservation efforts.
4
Conclusions
In the course of this comprehensive literature review, the impact in sustainability
of BC on PA has been explored in depth, assessing in detail its pre-eminent advan-
tages and challenges. First of all, the inherent traceability provided by blockchain
technology enhances efﬁciency in resource management and product/service tracing,
essential for governance practices that prioritize long-term sustainability. Addition-
ally, the security guaranteed by cryptographic measures within BC instills trust in
processes overseen by authorities, a critical component for implementing policies
focused on transparency and enduring viability. Cybersecurity, in constant evolution,
persists as a critical research domain, focusing on the identiﬁcation of vulnerabilities
and the development of strategies aimed at safeguarding data integrity in the dynamic
BC environment. Furthermore, the automation of procedures through smart contracts
enhances operational efﬁciency and promotes economic and ecological resilience.
The reliable nature of data ensures integrity and transparency in government docu-
ments, crucial for regulatory compliance and responsible sustainability efforts. The
decentralized nature and transparency facilitated by BC foster citizen engagement
in decision-making processes, thus advancing governance with a sustainable focus.
On the ethical and social level, assessing the impact of BC on PA, considering facets
such as privacy, equitable access and ethics in the use of technology, is a key area of
research.
The Use of Blockchain in Public Administration: A Transformative …
243
Inconclusion,thesigniﬁcanceofintegratingsustainabilityresearchintotheeduca-
tion and training of government ofﬁcials in BC is underscored as a critical element to
bridge the knowledge gap and enable effective utilization of this technology within
PA. However, several substantial challenges have been identiﬁed that require focused
attention to optimize the effectiveness of BC implementation in government settings.
Future research on blockchain technology’s impact on sustainability in PA should
prioritize critical areas such as scalability, regulatory frameworks, environmental
impact, and standards for governmental use.
Investigating scalable solutions tailored for government operations can address
limitations and promote sustainable practices. Understanding regulatory needs is
crucial for ensuring security and data integrity. Longitudinal studies on environ-
mental impact are essential for informing mitigation strategies while maintaining
blockchain’s sustainability. Establishing standards for governmental BC use is vital
for safeguarding data security and promoting interoperability. Moreover, enhancing
accessibility and inclusiveness in decision-making activities can further support
sustainability efforts.
Cross-disciplinary collaborations among scholars, policymakers, and stake-
holders are indispensable for advancing understanding and implementing sustainable
governance practices in response to sustainable challenges.
References
Abdul Bujang SD, Selamat A, Krejcar O, Maresova P, Nguyen, NT (2020) Digital learning
demand for future education 4.0-case studies at Malaysia education institutions. Informatics
7(2). Scopus. https://doi.org/10.3390/informatics7020013
Aburumman N, Fraij J, Szilágyi R (2020) Digitalization: the use of blockchain in public sector.
Oradea J Bus Econ 5(2):72–82. https://doi.org/10.47535/1991ojbe113
Adam I, Fazekas M (2021) Are emerging technologies helping win the ﬁght against corruption?
a review of the state of evidence. Inf Econ Policy 57. Scopus. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infoec
opol.2021.100950
Akhmetbek Y, Špaček D (2021) Opportunities and barriers of using blockchain in public adminis-
tration: the case of real estate registration in Kazakhstan. NISPAcee J Public Adm Policy 14(2).
Scopus. https://doi.org/10.2478/nispa-2021-0014
Aldieri L, Gatto A, Vinci CP (2021) Evaluation of energy resilience and adaptation policies:
an energy efﬁciency analysis. Energy Policy 157:112505. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2021.
112505
Allen DWE, Berg C, Markey-Towler B, Novak M, Potts J (2020) Blockchain and the evolution of
institutional technologies: implications for innovation policy. Res Policy 49(1):103865. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2019.103865
Aysan AF, Bergigui F, Disli M (2021) Blockchain-based solutions in achieving SDGs after COVID-
19. J Open Innov: Technol, Mark, Complex 7(2):151. https://doi.org/10.3390/joitmc7020151
Bachynskyy T, Radeiko R (2019) Legal regulations of blockchain and cryptocurrency in Ukraine.
Hung J Leg Stud 60(1):3–17. Scopus. https://doi.org/10.1556/2052.2019.60102
Bai CA, Cordeiro J, Sarkis J (2020) Blockchain technology: business, strategy, the environment,
and sustainability. Bus Strateg Environ 29(1):321–322. https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2431
244
M. C. Castillo and I. N. Corti
Bai CA, Sarkis J (2017) Improving green ﬂexibility through advanced manufacturing technology
investment: modeling the decision process. Int J Prod Econ 188:86–104. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijpe.2017.03.013
Bodó B, Janssen H (2022) Maintaining trust in a technologized public sector. Policy Soc 41(3):414–
429. Scopus. https://doi.org/10.1093/polsoc/puac019
Brinkmann M (2021) The realities of Blockchain-based new public governance. Digit Govt: Res
Pract 2(3). Scopus. https://doi.org/10.1145/3462332
Cagigas D, Clifton J, Díaz-Fuentes D, Fernández-Gutiérrez M (2021) Blockchain for public
services: a systematic literature review. IEEE Access 9. https://doi.org/10.13904/13921
Cagigas D, Clifton J, Díaz-Fuentes D, Fernández-Gutiérrez M, Echevarría-Cuenca J, Gilsanz-
Gómez C (2022) Explaining public ofﬁcials’ opinions on blockchain adoption: a vignette
experiment. Policy and Society 41(3):343–357. https://doi.org/10.1093/polsoc/puab022
Calandra D, Secinaro S, Massaro M, Dal Mas F, Bagnoli C (2023) The link between sustain-
able business models and Blockchain: a multiple case study approach. Bus Strateg Environ
32(4):1403–1417. https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.3195
Catalini C, Gans JS (2020) Some simple economics of the blockchain. Commun ACM 63(7):80–90.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3359552
Cerchione R, Centobelli P, Riccio E, Abbate S, Oropallo E (2023) Blockchain’s coming to hospital
to digitalize healthcare services: designing a distributed electronic health record ecosystem.
Technovation 120:102480. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovation.2022.102480
Changwony FK, Campbell K, Tabner IT (2015) Social engagement and stock market participation.
Rev Financ 19(1):317–366. https://doi.org/10.1093/rof/rft059
Cirillo A, Dalena V, Mauro A, Mogavero F, Pennino D, Pizzonia M, Vitaletti A, Zecchini M (2022)
Empowering citizens by a blockchain-based Robinson list. Int J Comput Appl 44(10):920–928.
https://doi.org/10.1080/1206212X.2021.1986245
De Filippi P, Loveluck B (2016) The invisible politics of bitcoin: governance crisis of a decentralized
infrastructure. Internet Policy Rev 5(3). https://doi.org/10.14763/2016.3.427
Dziundziuk V, Dziundziuk B (2022) Implementation of management decisions for the implemen-
tation of blockchain technologies in public authorities. Theory Pract Public Adm 1(74):7–21.
https://doi.org/10.26565/1727-6667-2022-1-01
Elisa N, Yang L, Chao F, Cao Y (2023) A framework of blockchain-based secure and privacy-
preserving E-government system. Wirel Netw 29(3):1005–1015. Scopus. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s11276-018-1883-0
Engin Z, Treleaven P (2019) Algorithmic government: automating public services and supporting
civil servants in using data science technologies. Comput J 62(3):448–460. Scopus. https://doi.
org/10.1093/comjnl/bxy082
European Commission (2021) Propuesta de decisión del Parlamento Europeo y del Consejo por la
que se establece el programa de política «Itinerario hacia la Década Digital» para 2030. https://
eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/ES/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52021PC0574
Fiorentino S, Bartolucci S (2021) Blockchain-based smart contracts as new governance tools for
the sharing economy. Cities 117. Scopus. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cities.2021.103325
Glavanits J (2020) Sustainable Public Spending Through Blockchain European. J Sustain Dev
9:317–317
Goldsmith L, Shaikh AK, Tan HY, Raahemifar, K (2022) A review of contemporary governance
challenges in Oman: can blockchain technology be part of sustainable solutions? Sustainability
14(19).https://doi.org/10.3390/su141911819
Grover P, Kar AK, Janssen M (2019) Diffusion of blockchain technology: Insights from academic
literature and social media analytics. J Enterp Inf Manag 32(5):735–757. Scopus. https://doi.
org/10.1108/JEIM-06-2018-0132
Iftekhar A, Cui X, Yang Y (2021) Blockchain technology for trustworthy operations in the
management of strategic grain reserves. Foods 10(10). Scopus. https://doi.org/10.3390/foods1
0102323
The Use of Blockchain in Public Administration: A Transformative …
245
Jayawardhana A, Colombage S (2020) Does blockchain technology drive sustainability? an
exploratory review. Gov Sustain 17–42. https://doi.org/10.1108/s2043-052320200000015002
Kuo CC, Shyu, JZ (2021) A cross-national comparative policy analysis of the blockchain technology
between the USA and china. Sustainability (Switzerland) 13(12). Scopus. https://doi.org/10.
3390/su13126893
Lindgren I, Madsen CØ, Hofmann S, Melin U (2019) Close encounters of the digital kind: a research
agenda for the digitalization of public services. Gov Inf Q 36(3):427–436. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.giq.2019.03.002
Lu Z, Wang H, Liu G, Yang L, Cai C (2020) Optimization of the layout in land redevelopment
based on the comparative advantage perspective. J Urban Plan Dev 146(4). Scopus. https://doi.
org/10.1061/(ASCE)UP.1943-5444.0000607
Mattila J (2016) The blockchain phenomenon—the disruptive potential of distributed consensus
architectures (working paper 38). In: ETLA working papers. The Research Institute of the
Finnish Economy. https://www.econstor.eu/handle/10419/201253
Maza MV (2019) The blockchain boom and its real possibilities of application in the records of
public administrations. Revista de Internet, Derecho y Politica, vol 28, pp 109–126. Scopus.
https://doi.org/10.7238/idp.v0i28.3154
Metechko LB, Sorokin AE (2023) Prerequisites for the phenomenon of global digitalization and its
features in Russia. Int J Comput Digit Syst 13(1):617–624. Scopus. https://doi.org/10.12785/
ijcds/130149
Nakamoto S (2008) Bitcoin: a peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Decentralized Bus Rev
Ølnes S, Ubacht J, Janssen M (2017) Blockchain in government: beneﬁts and implications of
distributed ledger technology for information sharing. Gov Inf Q 34(3):355–364. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.giq.2017.09.007
Parmentola A, Petrillo A, Tutore I, De Felice F (2022) Is blockchain able to enhance environmental
sustainability? a systematic review and research agenda from the perspective of sustainable
development goals (SDGs). Bus Strateg Environ 31(1):194–217. https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.
2882
Pelt R, van Jansen S, Baars D, Overbeek S (2021) Deﬁning blockchain governance: a framework
for analysis and comparison. Inf Syst Manag 38(1):21–41. https://doi.org/10.1080/10580530.
2020.1720046
Rana R, Giungato P, Tarabella A, Tricase C (2019) Blockchain applications and sustainability
issues. Amﬁteatru Econ 21(13):669–870. https://doi.org/10.24818/EA/2019/S13/861
Rukanova B, van Engelenburg S, Ubacht J, Tan YH, Geurts M, Sies M, Molenhuis M, Slegt M,
van Dijk D (2023) Public value creation through voluntary business to government information
sharing enabled by digital infrastructure innovations: a framework for analysis. Gov Inf Q 40(2).
Scopus. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2022.101786
Sansone G, Santalucia F, Viglialoro D, Landoni P (2023) Blockchain for social good and stakeholder
engagement: evidence from a case study. Corp Soc Responsib Environ Manag. https://doi.org/
10.1002/csr.2477
Schletz M, Franke LA, Salomo S (2020) Blockchain application for the Paris agreement carbon
market mechanism—a decision framework and architecture. Sustainability 12(12):5069. https://
doi.org/10.3390/su12125069
Schmidt C, Krimmer R (2022) How to implement the European digital single market: Identifying
the catalyst for digital transformation. J Eur Integr 44(1):59–80. https://doi.org/10.1080/070
36337.2021.2011267
Schulz KA, Gstrein OJ, Zwitter AJ (2020) Exploring the governance and implementation of sustain-
able development initiatives through blockchain technology. Futures 122. Scopus. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.futures.2020.102611
Secinaro S, Calandra D, Biancone P (2021) Blockchain, trust, and trust accounting: can blockchain
technology substitute trust created by intermediaries in trust accounting? a theoretical exami-
nation. Int J Manag Pract 14(2):129–145. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJMP.2021.113824
246
M. C. Castillo and I. N. Corti
Shahaab A, Khan IA, Maude R, Hewage C, Wang Y (2023) Public service operational efﬁciency
and blockchain—a case study of companies house, UK. Gov Inf Q 40(1). Scopus. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.giq.2022.101759
Sharma S, Dwivedi Y, Misra S, Rana N (2023) Conjoint analysis of blockchain adoption challenges
in government. J Comput Inf Syst. https://doi.org/10.1080/08874417.2023.2185552
Shava E, Mhlanga D (2023) Mitigating bureaucratic inefﬁciencies through blockchain technology in
Africa. Front Blockchain 6. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/. https://doi.org/10.3389/fbloc.
2023.1053555
Son-Turan S (2019) The blockchain–sustainability nexus: can this new technology enhance social,
environmental and economic sustainability? Blockchain Econ Financ Mark Innov: Financ Innov
Digit Age 83–99. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-25275-5_5
Sousa MJ (2023) Blockchain as a driver for transformations in the public sector. Policy Des Pract
6:415–432. https://doi.org/10.1080/25741292.2023.2267864
Sun Yin HH, Langenheldt K, Harlev M, Mukkamala RR, Vatrapu R (2019) Regulating cryptocur-
rencies: a supervised machine learning approach to de-anonymizing the bitcoin blockchain. J
Manag Inf Syst 36(1):37–73. https://doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2018.1550550
Swan M (2015) Blockchain: blueprint for a new economy. O’Reilly Media Inc., Sebastopol
Tapscott D, Tapscott A (2016) The impact of the blockchain goes beyond ﬁnancial services. Harv
Bus Rev. https://hbr.org/2016/05/the-impact-of-the-blockchain-goes-beyond-ﬁnancial-services
Tavares EC, Meirelles FD, Tavares EC, Cunha MA, Schunk LM (2020) Blockchain in the Amazon:
creating public value and promoting sustainability. Inf Technol Dev 27:579–598
Tschorsch F, Scheuermann B (2016) Bitcoin and beyond: a technical survey on decentralized digital
currencies. IEEE Commun Surv Tutor 18(3):2084–2123. https://doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2016.
2535718
Turkanovic M, Podgorelec B (2020) Signing blockchain transactions using qualiﬁed certiﬁcates.
IEEE Internet Comput 24(6):37–43. Scopus. https://doi.org/10.1109/MIC.2020.3026182
Viano C, Avanzo S, Cerutti M, Cordero A, Schifanella C, Boella G (2022) Blockchain tools for
socio-economic interactions in local communities. Policy Soc 41(3):373–385. Scopus. https://
doi.org/10.1093/polsoc/puac007
Vrabie C (2023) E-Government 3.0: an AI model to use for enhanced local democracies.
Sustainability (Switzerland) 15(12). Scopus. https://doi.org/10.3390/su15129572
Yfantis V, Leligou HC, Ntalianis K (2021) New development: blockchain—a revolutionary tool for
the public sector. Policy Soc 41(5):408–411. https://doi.org/10.1080/09540962.2020.1821514
Zhang L, Mao J, An Y, Zhang T, Ma J, Feng C, Zhou X (2022) A systematic review of blockchain
technology for government information sharing. Comput, Mater Contin 74(1):1161–1181.
https://doi.org/10.32604/cmc.2023.032452
Zhu Q (2022) Research on public administration and resource allocation based on blockchain and
structured occupational therapy. Occup Ther Int 2022. Scopus. https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/
2623656
The Mediating Effect of Perceived
Persuasiveness on the Relationship
Between Gamiﬁed Reward in Ant Forest
and User’s Sustainable Behaviour
in China
Miao Huang, Mohamad Saifudin Mohamad Saleh, Izzal Asnira Zolkepli,
and Lei Wang
Abstract Gamiﬁcation is frequently used as a standard design module in creating
mobile applications. Gamiﬁed rewards are the one of the most effective in gamiﬁ-
cation elements in inﬂuencing users’ sustainable behaviour. Ant Forest, a Chinese
sustainable mobile application, encourages users to develop sustainable behaviours
in exchange for virtual and real rewards. Consequently, this study investigates the
perceived persuasiveness mediating effect in the relationship between gamiﬁed
reward in Ant Forest and users’ sustainable behaviour in China. This study ﬁlls
the gap by focusing on the inﬂuence of gamiﬁed reward and perceived persuasive-
ness on users’ sustainable behaviour with the Stimuli-Organism-Response Theory.
This study applied a survey technique with 621 samples of Ant Forest users across
China with stratiﬁed proportional sampling. The ﬁndings show that the gamiﬁed
reward in Ant Forest positively and strongly inﬂuences the perceived persuasiveness
on user. Simultaneously, perceived persuasiveness is a complementary partial medi-
ating effect on the relationship between gamiﬁed reward and sustainable behaviour.
These ﬁndings reasonably explain the mechanism of gamiﬁed reward and perceived
persuasiveness. It also demonstrates the importance of increasing gamiﬁed rewards to
improvetheperceivedpersuasiveness of mobileapplications andpromotesustainable
behaviours of users.
Keywords Gamiﬁcation · Reward · Perceived persuasiveness · Sustainable
behaviour · Ant forest · Stimuli-organism-response theory
M. Huang · M. S. Mohamad Saleh (B) · I. A. Zolkepli
School of Communication, Universiti Sains Malaysia, George Town, Malaysia
e-mail: saifudinsaleh@usm.my
M. Huang · L. Wang
School of Animation and Digital Arts, Communication University of China, Beijing, Nanjing,
China
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_15
247
248
M. Huang et al.
1
Sustainability Issues Caused by Vegetation Degradation
Climatechangeandthedynamicresponseofvegetationcausedbyitaretheecosystem
functions that affect the sustainable development of human beings (Afuye et al.
2021). Climate, water, and vegetation, as important factors affecting soil, are being
seriously threatened by soil degradation caused by population increase, improvement
of living standards and scarcity of natural resources (Lal 2020). Global sustainable
development faces the problem of land degradation, especially in desert areas (Zhang
et al. 2021a, b). Data show that more than 75% of land is being degraded, and it is
expected to rise to 90% by 2050, affecting billions of people (Zhang et al. 2021a, b).
As a core element of the land, soil is responsible for more than a quarter of all
greenhouse gas emissions in agricultural and forestry applications and is also under
enormous pressure from rising temperatures, prolonged droughts, and ﬂooding (Leal
Filho et al. 2023). China’s industrial and agricultural output has increased substan-
tially over the past century, but at the expense of ecosystem beneﬁts, resulting in
problems such as ﬂooding, water pollution, climate imbalance, and decline in biolog-
ical species (Zheng et al. 2019). For example, the typical loess area in northern China
has severe and large-scale landslides due to rapid urban expansion and vegetation
reduction, making it an area with frequent geological disasters in China (Juang et al.
2019).
According to 2019 data, China’s carbon dioxide emissions accounted for 28% of
global emissions, making it the world’s largest carbon dioxide emitter (Friedlingstein
et al. 2020). Over the past decade, the continuous ups and downs in carbon emis-
sions indicate that long-term emission reduction remains a major challenge for the
Chinese government (Shan et al. 2020). In this context, the Chinese government is
actively investing in ecological restoration, deepening people’s cognition of nature,
and promoting the harmonious development of man and nature through classiﬁcation,
coordination, and integration.
The United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) provide an impor-
tant framework for China to reverse land degradation, which restores land observ-
able indicators through sustainable land management and restoration of land cover
(Sims et al. 2019). Among the monitoring indicators set for this purpose, vegetation
productivity is considered a mature indicator, which requires not only attention to the
physiological processes of plants, but also careful analysis of the factors considered
to inﬂuence it (Prince 2019).
2
Ant Forest Restore Vegetation Through Fintech
Technological, ﬁnancial companies (Fintech) manage many users with high efﬁ-
ciency and low cost through cloud services, artiﬁcial intelligence, and big data tech-
nologies, improve resource utilization efﬁciency, and reduce carbon emissions and
environmental pollution (Mi and Coffman 2019). Ant Forest is a green gamiﬁcation
The Mediating Effect of Perceived Persuasiveness on the Relationship …
249
module launched by Alipay, one of China’s largest digital payment platforms (Wang
et al. 2022a, b). Furthermore, Alipay is an outstanding representative of Fintech in
China (Zhang et al. 2021a, b). Ant Forest allows users to participate in green actions
by promoting users’ intrinsic motivation (social interaction, enjoyment, achieve-
ment, mutual assistance) and extrinsic motivation (reward, competition, cooperation)
(Wang et al. 2022a, b).
Ant Forest creates a carbon account for each user and encourages users to convert
low-carbon behaviours (such as walking, paying online, using public transportation
and using shared bicycles) into virtual gamiﬁed rewards (Ashfaq et al. 2021). When
the virtual rewards in the user’s carbon account reach a certain value, Ant Forest will
redeemarealplantfortheuserandplantitinthedesertedareasthatneedtoberestored
to green (Ashfaq et al. 2021). As of the end of May 2020, Ant Forest has gathered 550
million users who are keen to practice pro-environmental behaviours and has planted
more than 200 million plants in desert areas, which has made a positive contribution
to China’s low-carbon goals (Zhang et al. 2022). Ant Forest has cultivated many
online green users through digital technology (Chen et al. 2020). These users are
satisﬁed through the entertainment function of Ant Forest, which makes their social
motivation positively correlated with environmental awareness (Chen et al. 2020).
Therefore, analyzing Ant Forest users’ feelings and attitudes towards game functions
is extremely important for gaining insight into users’ motivations for sustainable
behaviours (Ashfaq et al. 2021).
3
The Role of Gamiﬁcation in Ant Forest
Using gamiﬁcation to stimulate users to promote their behaviour has become a new
research ﬁeld, which is extremely important for increasing potential users for the
platform and motivating their willingness to protect the environment (Xiong et al.
2022). Gamiﬁcation refers to using game elements in non-game contexts to achieve
individual or group goals. It can also be called a “serious game”, and has devel-
oped a practical, systematic theory (Krath et al. 2021). Ant Forest combines people’s
sustainablelifestylewithreal-worldafforestationthroughavirtualgamiﬁcationexpe-
rience, which motivates the public to participate in sustainable behaviour (Mi et al.
2021). The gamiﬁcation elements of Ant Forest can be divided into four categories:
rewards, feedback, task design and social interaction (Wang and Yao 2020). Among
them, reward elements represented by virtual medals and ofﬁcial certiﬁcates are
most recognised by users (Wang and Yao 2020). Gamiﬁcation incentives are used to
provide feedback on the participation of Ant Forest users so that they can accurately
record the results of behavioural efforts (Yang & Cai, 2019).
The success of Ant Forest is due to the rapid development of China’s social
economy and mobile Internet technology (Chen and Cai 2019). Its gamiﬁcation
and participatory communication practice integrates mobile media technology and
public power, resulting in a good user experience and effective persuasive effect
(Chen and Cai 2019). Ant Forest integrates gamiﬁcation functions to build a new
250
M. Huang et al.
persuasive system (Sun and Xing 2022). Its advantage lies in the combination of
game elements and persuasive functions, which makes the gamiﬁcation persuasive
system more interesting and immersive than traditional ones (Sun and Xing 2022).
The persuasive system of Ant Forest has the attributes of both gamiﬁcation and social
media (Yang et al. 2018). Task support, perceived credibility, and perceived social
support affect perceived persuasiveness, sense of accomplishment, and perceived
entertainment, ultimately affecting users’ continuous usage intentions (Yang et al.
2018).
4
Application of the Stimuli-Organism-Response Theory
in Gamiﬁcation Research
In order to study how the gamiﬁcation reward elements in Ant Forest affect the
sustainable behaviour of users, this study plans to use The Stimuli-Organism-
Response Theory to research this process. The Stimuli-Organism-Response Theory,
often referred to simply as the S-O-R Theory, is often used to study how people’s
motivation and behaviour are affected by external stimuli (Goi et al. 2014; Vieira
2013).TheS-O-RTheorywasproposedbyMehrabianandRussell(1974)andusually
included three variables: (1) Stimulus (S) for the predictor variable, (2) Organism (O)
for the intervening variable, and (3) Response (R) for the outcome variable (Vieira
2013).
In order to correspond to the theoretical framework of the S-O-R Theory, this
study sets the gamiﬁed reward as the predictor variable (Stimulus) (Tak and Gupta
2021). Research by Tak and Gupta (2021) shows that adding reward elements to
applications can stimulate users to respond and excite them. The perceived persua-
siveness is the intervening variable (Organism) (Gao et al. 2021). In this study, the
perceived persuasiveness can be understood as the approximate effect of the human
individual sensing the effectiveness of external interventions (Thomas et al. 2019).
Theperceivedpersuasivenesscanalsobefurtherinterpretedastheeffectofthehuman
individual feeling the interactive system and changing their behaviour (Oyibo and
Morita 2022). The sustainable behaviour is the outcome variable (Response) (Pili-
grimienė et al. 2020). Sustainable behaviour is the user’s response to external stimuli
and self-identity (Lavuri et al. 2023). The research on sustainable behaviour as the
response is a common application context of the S-O-R Theory (Busalim et al. 2022).
Therefore, after substituting the variables into the theoretical framework of the
S-O-R Theory, this study determined the theoretical framework (Fig. 1).
The study by Orji et al. (2019) selected ten persuasion strategies, including
rewards, and proved that rewards provide persuasiveness by increasing users’ satis-
faction (especially men) with signiﬁcant effects. This view is also supported by
Cemiloglu et al. (2023), who also pointed out that users have the highest sensitivity
to in-game rewards among all persuasive design techniques. Therefore, this study
hypothesised as follows:
The Mediating Effect of Perceived Persuasiveness on the Relationship …
251
Fig. 1 Theoretical framework of this study
H1. The gamiﬁed reward positively inﬂuences the perceived persuasiveness on
user in Ant Forest.
Persuasive systems can evoke users’ behavioural changes to achieve desired objec-
tives, such as increasing user loyalty, health awareness, or sustainable behaviour
(Shevchuk and Oinas-Kukkonen 2019). Applying persuasive technology to e-
learning management systems can encourage positive learning behaviours and thus
change students’ study habits (Ahmad et al. 2022). Therefore, this study hypothesised
as follows:
H2. The perceived persuasiveness on Ant Forest user positively inﬂuences the
user’s sustainable behaviour.
Gamiﬁed rewards based on badges and trophies can strengthen users’ acquisition of
sustainability knowledge and ultimately affect their behavioural values (Whittaker
et al. 2021). Gamiﬁed rewards can provide users with social and economic incentives,
and Ant Forest promotes users’ pro-environmental behaviour through dual incentives
(Xiong et al. 2022). Therefore, this study hypothesised as follows:
H3. The gamiﬁed reward positively inﬂuences the user’s sustainable behaviour
through Ant Forest.
Gamiﬁed persuasive systems are very effective in motivating user behavioural
change, and these systems are often designed to use rewards and punishments to
achieve the desired effects (Orji et al. 2023). Gamiﬁcation can trigger a state of deep
interaction between users and the information system, making users feel the persua-
siveness of the gamiﬁcation persuasive system, resulting in behavioural changes
(Shevchuk et al. 2019). Therefore, this study hypothesised as follows:
H4. The perceived persuasiveness on Ant Forest user mediates the relationship
between the gamiﬁed reward and the user’s sustainable behaviour.
252
M. Huang et al.
5
Research Design
This study used the research method of quantitative survey with Wenjuanxing, the
largest online questionnaire platform in China, to make an online questionnaire to
collect survey data (Zhang et al. 2020). After the online questionnaire was designed,
it was distributed and collected in the online community of Ant Forest users through
two common instant messaging applications in China, QQ and WeChat (Zhang et al.
2020).AntForesthasmorethan500millionusersacrossChina(Wangetal.2022a,b),
so this study applied a sampling formula (n = z2σ2/e2) suitable for a large population
(Leavy 2022). By calculating the formula, this study’s minimum number of samples
was determined to be 505 to ensure a 95% signiﬁcance level and 15% acceptable
error (Leavy 2022).
As of 2019, Ant Forest has more than 500 million users in China (Mi et al. 2021),
which has led researchers to choose stratiﬁed proportional sampling to alleviate the
difﬁculties caused by the large sampling population (Sekaran and Bougie 2016). In
order to deal with the sampling problem of China’s large population and cities, this
study used the development status of Chinese cities as the stratiﬁcation basis for
sampling (Guan et al. 2019). According to Government Data (2022), the six cities of
Shanghai, Wuhan, Harbin, Lanzhou, Shuozhou, and Beihai were randomly selected
according to three different sizes (extra-large, large, and small and medium-sized)
(State Council 2014). According to the norms of stratiﬁed proportional sampling,
the researchers allocated the number of samples according to the population ratio of
each city (Sekaran and Bougie 2016).
According to the theoretical framework of this study, the researchers developed
three constructs from previous studies corresponding to the three variables. Among
them, the construct for gamiﬁed reward includes 6 items developed by Zhang et al.
(2021a, b), the construct for perceived persuasiveness includes 5 items developed by
Busch et al. (2016), and the construct for sustainable behaviour includes 5 items
developed from the research of Shaﬁei and Maleksaeidi (2020) (see Appendix
1). Considering research ethics, participants will be informed about the research
overview and their rights before answering the questionnaire (Brown et al. 2022).
Participants voluntarily provide personal information, which will be treated conﬁden-
tially to protect participants’ privacy (Paulin et al. 2022). The questionnaire adopts
the ﬁve-level Likert-type scale evaluation standard (1 = Strongly Disagree, 2 =
Disagree, 3 = Neutral, 4 = Agree, 5 = Strongly Agree) (Phakiti 2020).
A total of 621 valid responses were obtained in this online questionnaire, and the
characteristics of respondents are shown in Table 1. According to the requirements of
stratiﬁed proportional sampling, the researchers controlled the proportion of respon-
dents from each city. According to the statistical results, the main users of Ant Forest
are young and middle-aged people (18–49 years old), accounting for 76.7%. Among
them, the sex ratio of men and women is roughly equal (M: F = 1.06:1), which is
also in line with the gender status of the Chinese population (Su et al. 2022).
The Mediating Effect of Perceived Persuasiveness on the Relationship …
253
Table 1 Respondent characteristic
Respondent information
Frequency
Percentage
City
Shanghai
288
46.4
Wuhan
125
20.1
Herbin
113
18.2
Lanzhou
51
8.2
Shuozhou
22
3.5
Beihai
22
3.5
Age
18–29
185
29.8
30–39
172
27.7
40–49
119
19.2
50–59
65
10.5
60–69
54
8.7
70–79
23
3.7
80 and above
3
0.5
Gender
Male
320
51.5
Female
301
48.5
Education
Below high school
31
5.0
High school
157
25.3
Undergraduate
361
58.1
Postgraduate
72
11.6
Ant Forest using duration
Below 1 month
98
15.8
1–5 months
189
30.4
6 months–1 year
211
34.0
Above 1 year
123
19.8
Ant Forest using frequency
Never
0
0.0
Every few days
156
25.1
Once a day
248
39.9
Several times a day
217
34.9
Ant Forest using achievement
No “green energy” collection
0
0.0
Collected “green energy” but never
planted a tree
187
30.1
Planted a tree
317
51.1
Planted multiple trees
117
18.8
6
Research Results
Smart-PLS software (V4.0) was used to analyze survey data for measurement and
evaluation. First, the assessment results of the measurement model were obtained
through the PLS-SEM algorithm. The results show that the outer loading of all items
254
M. Huang et al.
is higher than 0.7, representing a high degree of credibility (Nasution et al. 2020).
The values of Cronbach’s Alpha and Composite Reliability (CR) of each variable are
higher than 0.7, while the values of Average Variance Extracted (AVE) are higher
than 0.5, which means that the results of the questionnaire in this study have good
consistency and reliability (Hair et al. 2019).
Two common methods, the Heterotrait-Monotrait Ratio (HTMT) Criterion and the
Fornell & Larcker criterion, were used to evaluate the discriminant effectiveness in
this study (Afthanorhan et al. 2021). All the values in the HTMT Criterion are lower
than 0.9 (Sarstedt et al. 2021). At the same time, the square root of each variable’s
AVE in the Fornell-Larcker Criterion is greater than the correlations with other latent
variables (Hair et al. 2021). The analysis results meeting the above double standards
represent that this study has qualiﬁed discriminant validity (Sarstedt et al. 2021; Hair
et al. 2021).
The calculation function of bootstrapping resampling in the Smart-PLS software
was applied to detect hypotheses in the research study framework. The data is calcu-
lated to obtain the path coefﬁcient from the structural model (Table 2). In the data
validation of the direct effect hypothesis, the H1 on the effect of gamiﬁed reward
on perceived persuasiveness is positive and signiﬁcant (β = 0.710, p = 0.000). The
impact of perceived persuasiveness veriﬁed by H2 on sustainable behaviour is posi-
tive and signiﬁcant (β = 0.217, p = 0.000). H3, used to verify the impact of gamiﬁed
reward on sustainable behaviour, is also positive and signiﬁcant (β = 0.369, p =
0.000). In addition, the indirect effect of perceived persuasiveness as the mediator on
the relationship between gamiﬁed reward and sustainable behaviour is positive and
signiﬁcant (β = 0.154, p = 0.000), meaning that all the hypotheses of this research
have been proved to be true.
Sincetheparametersinthepathcoefﬁcientstestcanonlyrepresentthesigniﬁcance
of the effect and cannot indicate the size of the effect, this study additionally tested
the results of f 2 to judge the effect size (Hair et al. 2019). According to the standard
proposed by Cohen (2013), the effect size of H1 can be judged as large, which means
that gamiﬁed reward greatly inﬂuences perceived persuasiveness. The effect size of
H2 and H3 can be judged as small, which means that perceived persuasiveness and
gamiﬁed reward have little impact on sustainable (Table 2). The inﬂuence of the
mediating effect in H4 will be discussed separately below.
At the same time, Fig. 2 shows that the graphical structural model of this study
includes the R2 of the two dependent variables. The R2 values of perceived persua-
siveness and sustainable behaviour were lower than 0.9, maintaining a suitable ﬁt
(Hair et al. 2019). According to the standard provided by Hair et al. (2019), the
R2 (0.504) of perceived persuasiveness was judged as moderate, indicating that this
study included 50.4% of the factors affecting perceived persuasiveness. Correspond-
ingly, the R2 (0.297) of sustainable behaviour is judged as weak, which means this
study only includes 29.7% of the factors that affect sustainable behaviour (Hair et al.
2019).
In order to further determine the mediating effect of perceived persuasiveness
according to the research objectives, this study calculated according to the VAF
(Variance Accounted For), Value standard proposed by Hair Jr et al. (2017). In this
The Mediating Effect of Perceived Persuasiveness on the Relationship …
255
Table 2 Structural model results
Hypothesis/
Relationship
Effect
type
Std.
beta
(β)
Std.
dev
t-value
p-value
Decision
f 2
Effect
H1
Gamiﬁed
Reward ->
Perceived
Persuasiveness
Direct
0.710
0.029
24.410
0.000
Accept
1.014
Large
H2
Perceived
Persuasiveness
-> Sustainable
Behaviour
Direct
0.217
0.057
3.825
0.000
Accept
0.033
Small
H3
Gamiﬁed
Reward ->
Sustainable
Behaviour
Direct
0.369
0.059
6.236
0.000
Accept
0.096
Small
H4
Gamiﬁed
Reward ->
Perceived
Persuasiveness
-> Sustainable
Behaviour
Indirect
0.154
0.040
3.885
0.000
Accept
–
–
Fig. 2 Structural model with R2 and path coefﬁcients
standard, VAF Value requires the calculation of the proportion of indirect effect in
total effect (direct effect + indirect effect), which is used to determine the mediating
effect as no mediation (VAF < 20%), partial mediation (20% ≤VAF ≤80%) and
full mediation (VAF > 80%) (Hair Jr et al. 2017). The calculation result of VAF is
29.4%, which can be judged as perceived persuasiveness to achieve the effect of
partial mediation (Table 3).
256
M. Huang et al.
Table 3 VAF Value
Indirect effect = βH1 × βH2
0.154
Total Effect = βH1 × βH2 + βH3
0.523
VAF = Indirect effect/Total effect
29.4%
7
Discussion
First, it can be concluded that the three characteristics of Ant Forest users are high
education level, long service life and high participation through the analysis of the
characteristics of the participant’s personal information. These results are mutually
veriﬁed with the conclusions drawn by other related studies of Ant Forest, and it can
be inferred that users of Ant Forest have strong cognitive ability and enthusiasm for
participation (Ashfaq et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022a, b; Zhang et al. 2022, 2020; Mi
et al. 2021).
Second, the gamiﬁed reward provided by Ant Forest has greatly promoted its
persuasiveness on users, which also achieved the ﬁrst research objective of this
study. In addition, gamiﬁed rewards have also proven to be a very effective stimu-
lating element that meets the criteria of the S-O-R Theory (Shankar 2022). Most Ant
Forest users are motivated by gamiﬁed rewards to continue using Ant Forest (Wang
et al. 2022a, b). This study also obtained approximate data (75% continuous usage
rate, 70% complete reward acquisition), which shows that gamiﬁed reward plays an
important role in Ant Forest. Game-based rewards play a positive role in persuasive
games, especially as physical rewards are more effective than virtual rewards (van
Dooren et al. 2019). Ant Forest also arouses environmental awareness by allowing
users to plant a real tree (Ashfaq et al. 2021). At the same time, the gamiﬁed reward
has also been proven to directly impact sustainable behaviour in Ant Forest, which
shows its importance in Ant Forest to promoting users’ sustainable behaviour. So,
the third research objective of this study has been achieved. Wang and Yao (2020)
detected that virtual rewards are the most effective gamiﬁcation elements in Ant
Forest to please users and promote their pro-environmental behaviour through the
Kano Model dedicated to game design testing. In addition, the effect of gamiﬁed
rewards is further expanded by the green advertising effect of Ant Forest so that it
can better inﬂuence the sustainable behaviour of users (Huang et al. 2023).
Third, perceived persuasiveness is an important variable because it has a signif-
icant positive impact on the sustainable behaviour of Ant Forest users. The second
research objective of this study has been achieved. The researchers pointed out that
perceived persuasiveness is the ability of human–computer interaction systems to
affect changes in user behaviour (Oyibo and Morita 2022). Therefore, this study
applies perceived persuasiveness as the Organism in the S-O-R Theory, representing
the interactive system’s effect that users can perceive as living organisms. After that,
the user’s sustainable behaviour change is used as the Response in the S-O-R Theory
to complete the entire impact process. The perceived persuasiveness of the persuasive
system can arouse user loyalty and improve user health awareness and sustainable
behaviour (Shevchuk and Oinas-Kukkonen 2019). Ant Forest integrates the above
The Mediating Effect of Perceived Persuasiveness on the Relationship …
257
elements as a reliable persuasive system to further promote the transformation of
users to a green lifestyle (Yang et al. 2018).
Fourth, the mediation effect of perceived persuasiveness has been conﬁrmed. It
can positively mediate the effect of gamiﬁed reward on sustainable behaviour, but
this effect is relatively small and partial (Hair Jr et al. 2017). Regarding the value
of the sustainable behaviour variable R2 (0.297), the inﬂuence of the variable in
this study only accounts for 29.7%, which shows that there are still other factors
at play. Persuasive systems can persuade people to make behavioural changes by
changing their perceptions, and gamiﬁcation can achieve this goal by enhancing the
persuasiveness of the system more playfully and emotionally (Wenker 2022). When
the user recognises the practicability of the system, perceived persuasiveness can
play a good intermediary role in inﬂuencing the user’s usage behaviour (Oyibo and
Vassileva 2020). In similar cases, researchers have also proved that perceived persua-
siveness can mediate the inﬂuence of internal and external factors of webcast content
on viewer behaviour (Gao et al. 2021). From a practical viewpoint, the reciprocity
and liking that gamiﬁed rewards bring users is the most effective promotion for the
inﬂuence of persuasive principles on individual behaviour (Ciocarlan et al. 2019).
8
Conclusion
This study applied the S-O-R Theory to verify the process of gamiﬁed reward
affecting users’ sustainable behaviour in Ant Forest and, at the same time, concluded
the partial mediating effect of perceived persuasiveness in this process. In addi-
tion, this study concluded that gamiﬁed rewards can play an active role as an effec-
tive Stimulus in the S-O-R Theory, which will positively affect future gamiﬁcation
research.
This study veriﬁes the impact of Ant Forest as a persuasive system on public
sustainable behaviour. Ant Forest has created a good brand image for its parent
company, gaining public recognition and enhancing its persuasiveness. A large
institution’s sustainable brand image and philosophy will promote positive public
attitudes towards the institution (Saleh et al. 2021). Therefore, this study suggests
that Ant Forest enhances its perceived persuasiveness with richer gamiﬁed rewards.
Mobile application developers can consider better integrating gamiﬁed reward into
the development company’s image promotion strategy to enhance the persuasive-
ness that the public can perceive, and use this comprehensive effect to promote the
public’s sustainable behaviour.
This study only tested the effect of gamiﬁed rewards in Ant Forest, but the gami-
ﬁcation elements of Ant Forest are not limited to rewards. In addition, the research
results of partial mediation of perceived persuasiveness and the lower R2 value indi-
cate that more elements affect users’ sustainable behaviour in the Ant Forest, which
will be a feasible research direction in the future.
258
M. Huang et al.
Acknowledgements Mohamad Saifudin Mohamad Saleh is the corresponding author for this
chapter.
This work is funded by Jiangsu Provincial Educational Science Planning Project Key Project
(2022), issued by Jiangsu Provincial Education Science Planning Leading Group and Communica-
tion University of China, Nanjing. Project title: Innovative Research on Children’s Logic Teaching
Practice in the Context of Gamiﬁcation (B/2022/04/42).
Appendix 1
Questionnaire Items
Variable
Code
Questionnaire item
Source
Reward
(RE)
RE1
Ant Forest provides entity
rewards, such as planting real
trees
Zhang et al. 2021a, b
RE2
Ant Forest provides entity
rewards according to task
behaviours (e.g., sustainable
behaviour, mobile payment)
RE3
Tangible reward is a popular
incentive mechanism to
encourage users’
participation in the Ant Forest
RE4
Ant Forest provides virtual
rewards, such as “green
energy.”
RE5
Ant Forest can precisely
evaluate my task behaviours
and increase my “green
energy.”
RE6
“Green energy” is a critical
measurement for my
performance or engagement
in Ant Forest
Perceived persuasiveness
(PP)
PP1
I ﬁnd Ant Forest useful in
environmental protection
Busch et al. 2016
PP2
I enjoy using Ant Forest for
public welfare activities
PP3
Ant Forest would make me
aware of environmental
protection
PP4
Ant Forest would have a
positive inﬂuence on my
attitude toward environmental
protection
(continued)
The Mediating Effect of Perceived Persuasiveness on the Relationship …
259
(continued)
Variable
Code
Questionnaire item
Source
PP5
Ant Forest would lead me to
comply with environmental
protection
Sustainable behaviour
(SB)
SB1
So far, I have been involved
in environmental protection
programs such as tree
planting, waste separation
and recycling
Shaﬁei and Maleksaeidi
2020
SB2
I try to save electrical energy
in daily life
SB3
I am involved in sharing the
environmental information of
my surroundings
SB4
I do not use disposable
tableware
SB5
I recycle the paper
References
Afthanorhan A, Ghazali PL, Rashid N (2021) Discriminant validity: a comparison of CBSEM
and consistent PLS using Fornell & Larcker and HTMT approaches. J Phys: Conf Ser
1874(1):012085. IOP Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1874/1/012085
Afuye GA, Kalumba AM, Orimoloye IR (2021) Characterisation of vegetation response to climate
change: a review. Sustainability 13(13):7265. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13137265
Ahmad WNW, Salim MHM, Rodzuan ARA (2022) An inspection of learning management systems
on persuasiveness of interfaces and persuasive design: a case in a higher learning institution. Int
J Adv Comput Sci Appl 13(10):684–692. https://doi.org/10.14569/IJACSA.2022.0131081
Ashfaq M, Zhang Q, Ali F, Waheed A, Nawaz S (2021) You plant a virtual tree, we’ll plant a
real tree: understanding users’ adoption of the Ant Forest mobile gaming application from a
behavioral reasoning theory perspective. J Clean Prod 310:127394. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcl
epro.2021.127394
Ashfaq M, Zhang Q, Zafar AU, Malik M, Waheed A (2022) Understanding Ant Forest continuance:
effects of user experience, personal attributes and motivational factors. Ind Manage Data Syst
122(2):471–498. https://doi.org/10.1108/IMDS-03-2021-0164
Brown SE, Scobbie L, Worrall L, Brady MC (2022) A multinational online survey of the goal setting
practice of rehabilitation staff with stroke survivors with aphasia. Aphasiology 1–25. https://
doi.org/10.1080/02687038.2022.2031861
Busalim A, Fox G, Lynn T (2022) Consumer behavior in sustainable fashion: a systematic literature
review and future research agenda. Int J Consum Stud 46(5):1804–1828. https://doi.org/10.1111/
ijcs.12794
Busch M, Patil S, Regal G, Hochleitner C, Tscheligi M (2016) Persuasive information security:
techniques to help employees protect organizational information security. In: Persuasive tech-
nology: 11th international conference, PERSUASIVE 2016, Salzburg, Austria, 5–7 April 2016,
Proceedings 11. Springer International Publishing, pp 339–351. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-31510-2_29
260
M. Huang et al.
Cemiloglu D, Arden-Close E, Hodge SE, Jiang N, Ali R (2023) Me versus them: exploring the
perception of susceptibility to persuasion in oneself and others in online gambling. In: Interna-
tional conference on persuasive technology. Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham, pp 369–388.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-30933-5_24
Chen B, Feng Y, Sun J, Yan J (2020) Motivation analysis of online green users: evidence from
Chinese “Ant Forest.” Front Psychol 11:1335. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01335
Chen Y, Cai D (2019) Ant forest through the haze: a case study of gamiﬁed participatory pro-
environmental communication in China. J 2(4):30. https://doi.org/10.3390/j2040030
Ciocarlan A, Masthoff J, Oren N (2019) Actual persuasiveness: impact of personality, age and
gender on message type susceptibility. In: Persuasive technology: development of persuasive
and behavior change support systems: 14th international conference, PERSUASIVE 2019,
Limassol, Cyprus, 9–11 April 2019, Proceedings 14. Springer International Publishing, pp
283–294. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-17287-9_23
Cohen J (2013) Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences, 2nd edn. Routledge, New
York
Friedlingstein P, O’Sullivan M, Jones MW, Andrew RM, Hauck J, Olsen A, Zaehle S (2020) Global
carbon budget 2020. Earth Syst Sci Data 12:3269–3340
Gao X, Xu XY, Tayyab SMU, Li Q (2021) How the live streaming commerce viewers process the
persuasive message: an ELM perspective and the moderating effect of mindfulness. Electron
Commer Res Appl 49:101087. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.elerap.2021.101087
Goi MT, Kalidas V, Zeeshan M (2014) Comparison of stimulus-organism-response framework
between international and local retailer. Procedia Soc Behav Sci 130:461–468. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.04.054
Government Data (2022) List of Chinese cities. Retrieved from http://data.acmr.com.cn/member/
city/city_md.asp
Guan T, Meng K, Liu W, Xue L (2019) Public attitudes toward sustainable development goals:
evidence from ﬁve Chinese cities. Sustainability 11(20):5793. https://doi.org/10.3390/su1120
5793
HairJrJF,HultGTM,RingleCM,SarstedtM,DanksNP,RayS(2021)Partialleastsquaresstructural
equation modeling (PLS-SEM) using R: a workbook. Springer Nature, German-British, pp
78–80. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80519-7
Hair JF Jr, Sarstedt M, Ringle CM, Gudergan SP (2017) Advanced issues in partial least squares
structural equation modeling. SAGE Publications, London, UK
Hair JF, Risher JJ, Sarstedt M, Ringle CM (2019) When to use and how to report the results of
PLS-SEM. Eur Bus Rev 31(1):2–24. https://doi.org/10.1108/EBR-11-2018-0203
Huang M, Mohamad Saleh MS, Zolkepli IA (2023) The moderating effect of green advertising on
the relationship between gamiﬁcation and sustainable consumption behavior: a case study of
the ant forest social media app. Sustainability 15(4):2883. https://doi.org/10.3390/su15042883
Juang CH, Dijkstra T, Wasowski J, Meng X (2019) Loess geohazards research in China: advances
and challenges for mega engineering projects. Eng Geol 251:1–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eng
geo.2019.01.019
Krath J, Schürmann L, Von Korﬂesch HF (2021) Revealing the theoretical basis of gamiﬁcation: a
systematic review and analysis of theory in research on gamiﬁcation, serious games and game-
based learning. Comput Hum Behav 125:106963. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2021.106963
Lal R (2020) Soil quality and sustainability. In: Methods for assessment of soil degradation. CRC
Press, pp 17–30. ISBN: 9781003068716
Lavuri R, Akram U, Akram Z (2023) Exploring the sustainable consumption behavior in emerging
countries: the role of pro-environmental self-identity, attitude, and environmental protection
emotion. Bus Strateg Environ 1:1–13. https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.3411
Leal Filho W, Nagy GJ, Setti AFF, ShariﬁA, Donkor FK, Batista K, Djekic I (2023) Handling the
impacts of climate change on soil biodiversity. Sci Total Environ 869:161671. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2023.161671
The Mediating Effect of Perceived Persuasiveness on the Relationship …
261
Leavy P (2022) Research design: quantitative, qualitative, mixed methods, arts-based, and
community-based participatory research approaches. Guilford Publications, New York, USA
Mehrabian A, Russell JA (1974) An approach to environmental psychology. The MIT Press, USA,
pp 795–796. ISBN: 9780262130905
MiL,XuT,SunY,ZhaoJ,LvT,GanX,ShangK,QiaoL(2021)PlayingAntForesttopromoteonline
green behavior: a new perspective on uses and gratiﬁcations. J Environ Manage 278:111544.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2020.111544
Mi Z, Coffman DM (2019) The sharing economy promotes sustainable societies. Nat Commun
10(1):1214. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-09260-4
Nasution MI, Fahmi M, Prayogi MA (2020) The quality of small and medium enterprises perfor-
mance using the structural equation model-part least square (SEM-PLS). J Phys: Conf Ser
1477(5):052052. IOP Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1477/5/052052
Orji R, Alslaity A, Chan G (2023) Towards understanding the mechanism through which reward
and punishment motivate or demotivate behaviours. Behav Inf Technol 1–25. https://doi.org/10.
1080/0144929X.2023.2196582
Orji R, Reilly D, Oyibo K, Orji FA (2019) Deconstructing persuasiveness of strategies in behaviour
change systems using the ARCS model of motivation. Behav Inf Technol 38(4):319–335. https://
doi.org/10.1080/0144929X.2018.1520302
Oyibo K, Morita PP (2022) The role UX design attributes play in the perceived persuasiveness
of contact tracing apps. Multimodal Technol Interact 6(10):88. https://doi.org/10.3390/mti610
0088
Oyibo K, Vassileva J (2020) HOMEX: persuasive technology acceptance model and the moderating
effect of culture. Front Comput Sci 2:10. https://doi.org/10.3389/fcomp.2020.00010
Paulin MV, Caney SM, Cosford KL (2022) Online survey to determine client perceptions of feline
chronic lower airway disease management: response to therapy, side effects and challenges
encountered. J Feline Med Surg 1098612X211070988. https://doi.org/10.1177/1098612X2110
70988
Phakiti A (2020) Likert-type Scale Construction. In: The Routledge handbook of second language
acquisition and language testing. Routledge, pp 102–114. ISBN: 9781351034784
Piligrimienė Ž, Žukauskaitė A, Korzilius H, Banytė J, Dovalienė A (2020) Internal and external
determinants of consumer engagement in sustainable consumption. Sustainability 12(4):1349.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su12041349
Prince SD (2019) Challenges for remote sensing of the sustainable development goal SDG 15.3.
1 productivity indicator. Remote Sens Environ 234:111428. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2019.
111428
Saleh MSM, Kassim NM, Tukur NA, Mukhiar SNS, Balaraman RA (2021) Sustainable universities
as brand marketing for universities: a case of Universiti Sains Malaysia. Media Watch 12(1):127–
148. https://doi.org/10.15655/mw_2021_v12i1_205463
Sarstedt M, Ringle CM, Hair JF (2021) Partial least squares structural equation modeling. In:
Handbook of market research. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp 587–632. https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-57413-4_15
Sekaran U, Bougie R (2016) Research methods for business: a skill building approach. Wiley, USA
Shaﬁei A, Maleksaeidi H (2020) Pro-environmental behavior of university students: application
of protection motivation theory. Glob Ecol Conserv 22:e00908. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gecco.
2020.e00908
Shan Y, Huang Q, Guan D, Hubacek K (2020) China CO2 emission accounts 2016–2017. Sci Data
7(1):54. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-020-0393-y
Shankar A (2022) Does reward gamiﬁcation drive brand relationship quality?: an experimental
approach. J Promot Manag 28(4):443–466. https://doi.org/10.1080/10496491.2021.2008578
Shevchuk N, Oinas-Kukkonen H (2019) Increasing intention to adopt green IS with persuasive
systems design: case JouleBug mobile application. In: Information systems development: infor-
mation systems beyond 2020 (ISD2019 Proceedings). Toulon, France. https://aisel.aisnet.org/
isd2014/proceedings2019/ISDMethodologies/11/
262
M. Huang et al.
Shevchuk N, Degirmenci K, Oinas-Kukkonen H (2019) Adoption of gamiﬁed persuasive systems
to encourage sustainable behaviors: interplay between perceived persuasiveness and cognitive
absorption. In: International conference on information systems ICIS 2019 proceedings, Dec 15–
18, Munich, Germany. Association for Information Systems. https://aisel.aisnet.org/icis2019/
behavior_is/behavior_is/3/
Sims NC, England JR, Newnham GJ, Alexander S, Green C, Minelli S, Held A (2019) Developing
good practice guidance for estimating land degradation in the context of the United Nations
sustainable development goals. Environ Sci Policy 92:349–355. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.env
sci.2018.10.014
State Council (2014) Circular of the state council on adjusting the criteria for the classiﬁcation of
city sizes. Retrieved from https://www.ndrc.gov.cn/xwdt/ztzl/xxczhjs/ghzc/201605/t20160509_
971910.html?code=&state=123
Su ZF, Fu YZ, Chen MY (2022) Impacts of a gender ratio change on china’s wage income distri-
butions. Emerg Mark Financ Trade 58(7):2066–2078. https://doi.org/10.1080/1540496X.2021.
1956899
Sun Y, Xing J (2022) The impact of gamiﬁcation motivation on green consumption behaviour—an
empirical study based on ant forest. Sustainability 15(1):512. https://doi.org/10.3390/su1501
0512
Tak P, Gupta M (2021) Examining travel mobile app attributes and its impact on consumer engage-
ment: an application of SOR framework. J Internet Commer 20(3):293–318. https://doi.org/10.
1080/15332861.2021.1891517
Thomas RJ, Masthoff J, Oren N (2019) Can I inﬂuence you? development of a scale to measure
perceived persuasiveness and two studies showing the use of the scale. Front Artif Intell 2:24.
https://doi.org/10.3389/frai.2019.00024
van Dooren MMM, Visch VT, Spijkerman R (2019) The design and application of game rewards
in youth addiction care. Information 10(4):126. https://doi.org/10.3390/info10040126
Vieira VA (2013) Stimuli–organism-response framework: a meta-analytic review in the store
environment. J Bus Res 66(9):1420–1426. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2012.05.009
Wang N, Hou W, Zhang X, Wang Z, Yang L (2022a) Quantifying the effects of the ‘Internet plus
Ecology’framework on carbon sink in the digital age: a representative study of Ant Forest in
China. Environ Res Lett 17(12):124005. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/aca2bf
Wang S, Ibrahiem MH, Li M (2022b) Motivations inﬂuencing Alipay users to participate in the Ant
Forest campaign: an empirical study. Int J Environ Res Public Health 19(24):17034. https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph192417034
Wang X, Yao X (2020) Fueling pro-environmental behaviors with gamiﬁcation design: identifying
key elements in ant forest with the kano model. Sustainability 12(6):2213. https://doi.org/10.
3390/su12062213
Wenker K (2022) A systematic literature review on persuasive technology at the workplace. Patterns
3(8):100545. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2022.100545
Whittaker L, Russell-Bennett R, Mulcahy R (2021) Reward-based or meaningful gaming? a ﬁeld
study on game mechanics and serious games for sustainability. Psychol Mark 38(6):981–1000.
https://doi.org/10.1002/mar.21476
Xiong N, Ren P, Sun B, He S, Jiang L, Cui H (2022) Inﬂuence of incentive mechanism and ﬁt
degree on user’s environmental behaviour—taking Alipay “Ant Forest” in China as an example.
Front Psychol 13:1033553. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1033553
Yang Z, Kong X, Sun J, Zhang Y (2018) Switching to green lifestyles: behavior change of Ant Forest
users. Int J Environ Res Public Health 15(9):1819. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15091819
Zhang B, Hu X, Gu M (2022) Promote pro-environmental behaviour through social media: an
empirical study based on Ant Forest. Environ Sci Policy 137:216–227. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.envsci.2022.08.020
Zhang L, Shao Z, Li X, Feng Y (2021a) Gamiﬁcation and online impulse buying: the moderating
effect of gender and age. Int J Inf Manage 61:102267. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2020.
102267
The Mediating Effect of Perceived Persuasiveness on the Relationship …
263
Zhang Y, Chen J, Han Y, Qian M, Guo X, Chen R, Xu D, Chen Y (2021b) The contribution of
Fintech to sustainable development in the digital age: ant forest and land restoration in China.
Land Use Policy 103:105306. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2021.105306
Zhang Y, Xiao S, Zhou G (2020) User continuance of a green behavior mobile application in China:
an empirical study of Ant Forest. J Clean Prod 242:118497. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.
2019.118497
ZhengH,WangL,PengW,ZhangC,LiC,RobinsonBE,WuX,KongL,LiR,XiaoY,XuW,Ouyang
Z,DailyGC(2019)Realizingthevaluesofnaturalcapitalforinclusive,sustainabledevelopment:
informing China’s new ecological development strategy. Proc Natl Acad Sci 116(17):8623–
8628. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1819501116
The Importance of Being Returned
from Bottled Water to Tap Water
in Turkey in Terms of Sustainable
Development
Canan Karakaş Ulusoy
Abstract In Turkey after 2000s, prefering policies of aimed at boundary span-
ning of urban areas and increasing of urban population, correspondingly, passing
to supplying urban drinking water requirements from central water treatment plants
have caused to arise important problems in terms of sustainability. In spite of puri-
fying process in accordance with domestic water standards especially in the metropo-
liten cities like Ankara and Istanbul, tap water has become not to drink. So, spring
water being necessary to be strategically protected has commenced to be consumed
as a bottled water for drinking water purposes, instead of concentration on why tap
water cannot drink. Today being explicitly experienced effects of climate change any
more, it is important that tap water can become to drink again in regards to sustain-
able development. Consequently, it is necessary to study topics in terms of economic,
social, environmental, management and sustainability that whether new urban and
urban water infrastructure systems planning policies should be preferred to ensure
that the tap water quality of urban water infrastructure systems will become drinkable
standard or policies aimed at bottled water, where plastic pollution is increasing day
by day and causing serious health problems and environmental pollution, should be
preferred. Therefore, the primary purpose of this article is to evaluate how the return
of bottled water to tap water for drinking purposes can be achieved in Turkey. The
secondary purpose of the article is to reveal the importance of achieving the potability
of tap water in terms of sustainable development. In this context, a theoretical analysis
based on literature review and professional knowledge and experience is preferred
as the method in writing the article. In this connection, in the introduction section
is summarized the reasons and solutions for not drinking tap water, and revealed its
relationship with sustainable development. In the second part, methods to solve tap
water quality problems are tried to be presented as a holistic view. In the third part,
domestic water supply systems; in the fourth part, the relationship between sustain-
able development and urban tap water is discussed. It is defend that sustainable urban
water service can be only achieved through sustainable urbanization. Finally, in the
C. Karakaş Ulusoy (B)
General Directorate of Highways, Section of Environmental Management, 06420 Çankaya,
Ankara, Türkiye
e-mail: culusoy@kgm.gov.tr
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_16
265
266
C. Karakaş Ulusoy
conclusion section; it has been concluded that planning the distribution of drinking
water is as important as the production of drinking water, for this, the current urban
planning approach and the existing centralized conventional water infrastructure
systems must be changed, and sustainable urban water service can be achieved by
planning a multi-centered, ﬂexible, multi-source, multi-disciplinary integrated urban
water infrastructure system based on protecting intergenerational equality, resistant
to climate change, a nature-based, nature-respecting, water-sensitive urban planning
approach.
Keywords Tap water · Bottled water · Plastic pollution · Health · Urban area ·
Sustainable development
1
Introduction
In Turkey, metropolitan municipalities and water and sewerage administrations afﬁl-
iated to this directorate are responsible for urban planning and meeting urban water
needs in metropolitan cities, and municipalities are responsible for cities without
metropolitan administration. The drinking and domestic water needs of cities are
met by central conventional urban water infrastructure systems that have been used
for more than two centuries. These systems are designed to overcome needs such as
water supply security, public health protection and ﬂood protection, emerging from
the holistic planning and design of water systems in ever-expanding urban areas to
meet changing needs in terms of public health and environmental concerns (Harald
2005; Nottarp-Heim et al. 2015).
In centralized conventional water infrastructure systems, water is transported
through the network. The water network includes water supply and distribution
systems. The task of water supply systems is to transmit raw water (taken from
dams, wells and springs) to the central drinking water treatment facility, where it is
puriﬁed through different physical, chemical and biological processes to ensure the
required quality standards. Puriﬁed water is stored in tanks used as intermediate units
to regulate daily water demand. Afterwards, it is offered for consumption through the
pipes and pump system in the water distribution systems (Der 2015). Drinking water
distribution systems are pressurized pipe networks that transmit puriﬁed drinking
water from the central treatment plant to the water meters in consumers’ buildings.
These networks consists of pipes, pumps, valves, water tanks and other hydraulic
equipment. Generally, pipes of different diameters, qualities (metal, plastic, steel,
cement) and lengths (from tens of meters to several hundred kilometers) used in the
network are buried underground (Liu et al. 2017a, b). Drinking water distribution
systems are ﬁnally connected to domestic water supply systems.
Domestic water supply systems (water installation) include the distribution
network parts connecting a house or building to the main water pipe and the pipes
within the building. They have long retention times, higher temperatures, and close
one-to-one contact with water (NRC 2006; Nguyen et al. 2012; Wang et al. 2013; Liu
The Importance of Being Returned from Bottled Water to Tap Water …
267
et al. 2017a). Distribution networks are the last barriers that protect drinking water
from pollutants during distribution. Therefore, it is directly related to the quality of
water offered for consumption (Liu et al. 2017a). However, in practice, although
puriﬁcation technologies have improved a lot and raw water is puriﬁed to drinking
water quality, it is possible that high quality puriﬁed water offered for consumption
is again contaminated in the distribution network and building installations and is
reduced to undrinkable quality. Water quality degradation can occur during trans-
portation in both distribution pipes and home or building pipes (Liu et al. 2017b).
Especially in metropolitan cities such as Ankara and Istanbul, water quality deteri-
orates again and the water ﬂowing from fountains becomes undrinkable, depending
on the distance of the houses to the treatment facility, the aging of the network
pipes, the pipe material used, the planning logic of home and building water supply
systems, the technical characteristics and aging of the materials used. For this reason,
domestic water users prefer to use domestic package puriﬁcation systems or bottled
water instead of tap water.
Bottledwateristhoughttobehealthierandmorehygienicthantapwater.However,
many studies have proven that bottled water is more unhealthy than tap water. For
example; water samples in single-use (PET) bottles of six different brands produced
and sold locally were examined, and the presence of microplastics was detected in all
analyzed samples. As a result of the analysis, a total of 207 microplastics were found
in 36 samples (Yozukmaz 2022). Another study stated that plastic bottle waters may
contain high levels of endocrine disruptors and microplastics (Villanuva et al. 2021;
Gambino et al. 2022). It is seen that microplastics not only harm human health, but
also cause serious environmental pollution (Rhodes 2018; Baran 2020; Guo et al.
2021; Luqman et al. 2021). In addition, when considering the road routes and annual
trip numbers of the vehicles used to convey water from strategically protected spring
water to bottling facilities, from there to distribute bottled water to markets or bottle
distribution ofﬁces in all cities and then to residences and workplaces; the use of fossil
fuels, contrary to greenhouse gas emissions reduction policies, and the resulting air
pollution and energy consumption is not a sustainable policy in terms of drinking
water supply and quality. So, determining the reasons for the deterioration of the
quality of water in the network and ﬁnding solutions to ensure the return of bottled
water to mains water, the effectiveness and efﬁciency of drinking water infrastructure
systems are extremely important and necessary in terms of drinking water quality,
safety, public health and sustainable development.
Since sustainable development is the total result of economic, social and environ-
mental sustainability achieved in each sector separately, it is extremely important for
the total sustainable development that urban water service, in particular, is econom-
ically, socially and environmentally sustainable. For this reason, many studies have
been carried out and continue to be carried out to ensure that water ﬂows continuously
and in potable quality from fountains and to provide urban drinking water service
in a sustainable manner (Brown and Farelly 2009; Brown et al. 2009; Makropoulos
et al. 2012; Marques and Leeuwen 2012; BrattebØ et al. 2013; Alegre and Covas
2015; Ingemarsson et al. 2022; Bilalova et al. 2023).
268
C. Karakaş Ulusoy
2
Methods for Troubleshooting Tap Water Quality
Problems
Tap water quality in urban water infrastructure systems, depending on the raw
water quality, treatment processes, disinfectant substances, pipe material used in
the distribution network, pipe aging and loss-leakage, in-pipe hydraulic water pres-
sure changes, in-pipe water temperature, and the time the water stays in the network,
developing bioﬁlm, free sediment and encrusting substances remixed into water and
in relation to the characteristics of domestic water supply systems can be deteriorated.
Because; in drinking water supply, not only production but also distribution is
very important. The quality of tap water can be as good as the conditions of the pipe
through which it ﬂows (Liu et al. 2017a). Drinking water distribution networks can
act as biological and physicochemical reactors that change and reduce water quality
during water transmission (Fish et al. 2017). Of course, risks and uncertainties are
inevitable factors in drinking water supply and sanitation (Savic 2005). However,
drinking water distribution systems are critical for maintaining the quality of urban
life (Zan et al. 2014). Therefore, risks must be minimized and high-quality puriﬁed
water must be ﬂowed from fountains. The ﬁrst step is to protect raw water quality.
Second, reclamation of puriﬁed water; third, distribution network cleaning; fourth,
monitoring; the ﬁfth is maintenance-repair and renovation, and the last is the planning
and quality of domestic water systems.
The Protection of Raw Water Quality: The protection and sustainability of raw
water quality is directly related to sustainable urban planning policies. However,
today, urbanization that is not compatible with the natural texture, that is; urbaniza-
tion, which is carried out without paying attention to settlement site selection, seis-
micity, drinking and utility water, surface and ground water, drainage, morphology,
ground properties, wind condition, land slope, landforms, building stones, raw mate-
rial resources and similar features, affects the loss of urban identity and urban
heritage, and even causes the history of the city to be lost (Kazancı et al. 2018).
Ankara, the capital of Turkey, is a very good example of this situation. Ankara
is a city that has lost its rivers, waterways, lakes, vineyards and gardens (Kazancı
et al. 2018). Many large and small rivers had been covered and their waters had
been connected to the sewage system, and river basins had been zoned for housing.
If Ankara was not built like this, but was planned in a water-sensitive manner,
preserving the river basins and lake areas, and preserving its natural structure, where
urban forests, green areas and agricultural areas continue to exist along intercon-
nected waterways; Would there be problems such as drought, water problems, air
pollution, which are predicted to become much more severe in the future, or to what
extent? Would Ankara’s urban value increase? Would Ankara be a more resilient and
livable city in terms of public health and water resources? Considering the answers
to questions such as these is extremely important in terms of determining the main
parameters that should be taken into consideration when planning new settlements
by drawing lessons from the past.
The Importance of Being Returned from Bottled Water to Tap Water …
269
Fig. 1 Schematic representation of protecting and improving the quality of underground and
surface raw water resources
Although urbanization in harmony with nature is the newest urbanization model
offered today for adaptation to climate change, it was actually the lifestyle of people
in historical periods. Considering the concept of sustainability, returning to this
lifestyle will ensure the continuity of societies. For this reason, it is now accepted that
protecting and improving the quality of underground and surface raw water resources
to be used for drinking water purposes is only possible by urban planning and land
use in a way that respects nature and is sensitive to water within the scope of the
ecosystem approach (Fig. 1).
For this reason, it is of great importance that water basins are not opened to
construction. For example; water conveyed by gravity from the Catskill and Delaware
Water Basin, where New York’s drinking water needs are met, is offered for consump-
tion only after disinfection, without puriﬁcation. It is of strategic importance not to
deteriorate raw water quality. For this reason, the water basin is protected. In this
context; in order to prevent the lands in the basin from being opened to development
and to protect the green area and forest area ecosystem, it has been decided by the
State Environmental Protection Directorate to purchase and expropriate all lands in
the water basin until 2025. At least 20.20 acres of land are purchased every year
(NYC 2010).
Besides; In order to ﬂow potable water from fountains, to minimize risks and
uncertainties, and to obtain the best results; all stages of urban drinking water
systems, from source to fountain, must be planned in a multi-dimensional and
multi-disciplinary manner.
Urban water systems (water supply, wastewater and rainwater) must be designed
and implemented together with other public investments, with an integrated plan-
ning approach, at the top of urban planning processes (Alegre and Covas 2015).
270
C. Karakaş Ulusoy
Figure 2 shows integrated water resources planning schematically. For this, ﬁrst of
all, strategic, tactical and business planning levels and their relationships with each
other, the methodology deﬁned at these planning levels, the tools and techniques used
should be carefully considered (Souza and Silva 2014; Alegre and Covas 2015). This
type of planning approach is the most important issue in protecting underground and
surface water resources, and therefore raw water quality. Accordingly, by obtaining
potable water with simple puriﬁcation process techniques, the elimination of the need
to use chemicals used in puriﬁcation processes will prevent the formation, accumu-
lation and mixing of substances originating from chemicals used in puriﬁcation in
the distribution network.
Improvement of Treated Water: Sustainable sanitation systems and the use
of compatible technology require decision-making by examining complex multiple
criteria (Spuhler et al. 2020). Properly improvement treated water can help prevent
uneven changes during distribution. For this reason, critical parameters in puriﬁcation
are; The distribution network should be determined according to the presence or
absence of old pipes downstream and the characteristics of pipe shells, free sediments
and bioﬁlm matrix. Because; The process of improvement treated water requires
serious examination and research (Liu et al. 2017a).
The Cleaning of Distribution Network: Since the quality of distributed drinking
water can only be as good as the conditions of the distribution network, one of the
recommended control strategies is to clean the pipe network before the quality of
Fig. 2 Integrated water resources planning
The Importance of Being Returned from Bottled Water to Tap Water …
271
water available for consumption changes. Three methods are used: cleaning with
water,airandcleaningball.Themethodcommonlyusedfordistributionpipecleaning
is known as one-way water washing. In this method; High velocity water (1.5 m/s)
is used to move sediments in the water and is discharged from the ﬁre hydrant. The
problem of the method is that water is wasted and it may not be effective in removing
adherent contaminants (tubers, crusts, bioﬁlm), especially when there are difﬁculties
in maintaining the required speed (Liu et al. 2017a).
Air cleaning is similar to spraying water. However; except for irregular ﬂow,
introducing air to create high velocity in the water column costs at least twice as
much as washing. Another alternative technique is to clean the inside of the pipe
with a cleaning ball (a lead-shaped object) by pushing or pulling along the pipelines
using water pressure. Hard balls have higher cleaning efﬁciency than soft balls.
Recently, cleaning with ice balls has been developed and accepted (Liu et al. 2017a).
In terms of application, considering the complexity and cost of each model, water and
air cleaning options are much more convenient compared to replacing the cleaning
ball and pipes.
Monitoring: Often, it is difﬁcult to monitor the release of pollutants in the distri-
bution network. Since the release is not periodic, the uncertainties regarding whether
and when the release will occur are often not perceived. In order to overcome this
problem,e.g.real-timewaterqualityparameterscanbemonitoredwithonlineparticle
counting and online cell counting using ﬂow cytometry. Samples taken at multiple
points in the distribution system can provide background data before water quality
changes. By comparing the data obtained from samples taken at the same points
during and after the quality change in the water offered for consumption with the
background data, very valuable information about the quality change occurring in
the distribution network can be obtained. However, online detection is limited. For
example, online tools for heavy metals and pathogens (such as As, Pb) are not yet
available. In addition, the release states of pollutants may be very low compared to
background and transition period measurements (Liu et al. 2017a). Therefore, this
issue needs to be investigated in more detail.
Maintenance—Repair, Replacement: Frequent bursts of old pipes and high
water losses require urgent renovations. The largest portion of the operation and
maintenance budget of water distribution systems consists of burst pipe repairs. The
earlier a burst is identiﬁed and repaired, the lower the cost of operation, mainte-
nance, water loss, and the risk of external contaminants entering the system (Capelo
et al. 2021). Intelligent management of the system requires the achievement of high
efﬁciency (Candelleri et al. 2014). This is just; the most appropriate and efﬁcient
technique can be made possible by correct design which is one of the most difﬁ-
cult tasks and instant monitoring of the drinking water network (Creacoa and Fran-
chinia 2014). In the light of today’s information, instant monitoring of water loss and
network water quality can be done the new internet of things technology as well as
using different acoustic techniques, SCADA and GIS systems (Radhakrishnan and
Wu 2020; Shahanas and Sivakumar 2016). It is predicted that this technology will
become widespread in the near future.
272
C. Karakaş Ulusoy
3
Domestic Water Supply Systems
Domestic water supply systems (home plumbing) are deﬁned as the drinking water
infrastructure between the water meter and the fountain connected to the drinking
water distribution network. It is the last phase of the water conveyed to ﬂow drinking
water from fountains. At this stage, water quality may change depending on water
temperature, residence time in the pipe and pipe materials while passing through
domestic water supply systems, just like in distribution systems (Moerman et al.
2014).
Temperature is an important parameter for water quality. For example; According
to the Drinking Water Law in the Netherlands, the temperature of drinking water
should not exceed the 25 °C threshold, both in the distribution network and in foun-
tains, which are the end-use point in homes. Therefore, Moerman et al. (2014) devel-
oped a temperature model for domestic water supply systems on behalf of the Dutch
Plumbers Organization in order to calculate the required pipe insulation for drinking
water pipes in pipe shafts in order to prevent the temperature from rising above
25 °C. Since the water temperature in the drinking water distribution system is equal
to the soil temperature at the pipe depth, it is assumed that the temperature in the
domestic water supply system is equal to the soil temperature around the drinking
water distribution system. When the model results are evaluated; In the Netherlands,
25 °C is the legal threshold; It has been determined that in the summer season or if
the hot water pipes of regional or ﬂoor heating are laid close to the drinking water
pipes, they may be exceeded due to the long residence time in the drinking water pipe
(Moerman et al. 2014). In this case, it is extremely important to ensure full insulation
in places where hot water pipes are close to drinking water pipes in order to prevent
the quality of the water ﬂowing from the fountain from deteriorating.
4
The Relationship Between Sustainable Development
and Urban Tap Water
Sustainable development is the simultaneous achievement of economic, social
and environmental developments (Miller et al. 2014). Therefore, the continuity of
local, regional, national and international studies that are multi-dimensional, multi-
disciplinary and dynamic enough to produce solutions to the problems of the age
is important in every sector. The common connotation of the words sustainability
and development already necessitates multi-sectorality, inter-sectorality and holistic
approach. Whether or not the sustainability of almost all sectors is linked to the
phenomenon of urbanization. Therefore, sustainable urban development is a target
policy for developed and developing countries.
Sustainable cities in the twenty-ﬁrst century should be cities where there is polit-
ical participation, socially equitable, economically vibrant and ecological renewal is
a priority (Uslu 2009).
The Importance of Being Returned from Bottled Water to Tap Water …
273
Flowing healthy, drinkable quality water from fountains is one of the most impor-
tant issues of sustainable development in terms of protecting human and natural
health and is directly related to sustainable urbanization. Climate change, all kinds
of wastes and chemical pollution caused by poor mining operations, plastic pollu-
tion, and urban and land use planning choices that are incompatible with nature
directly affect raw water quality. Drinking water quality and public health are also
affected by this situation. As a result, the costs of obtaining quality drinking water
and health expenses are increasing day by day. Therefore, it is extremely important
for sustainable development to establish the rules of transition to a circular economy
by choosing policies that reduce waste and pollution.
In cities where fresh water resources will decrease due to climate change in the
future and the urban population will increase, strategy and management changes
must be made in order to switch to resilient urban water management. Resilient
urban water management is based on the logic of meeting the water needs of today
and future generations in a healthy and sustainable way. Therefore, on the basis
of urban planning compatible with climate change; it is necessary to achieve the
transition from existing centralized conventional water infrastructure systems and
central wastewater treatment facilities to urban water infrastructure with discrete,
diversiﬁed water resources. For this reason, the planning approach of the existing
urban, water and wastewater infrastructure systems and housing technology must
change: Each local government must ﬁrst know the natural characteristics of its own
region very well. Zoning planning should be done in harmony with nature, respectful
of nature, sensitive to water, with a multi-sectoral and multi-stakeholder approach.
City, water, wastewater and stormwater infrastructure facilities should be planned
simultaneously and together.
Alternative water sources reduce dependence on a single source and the risk of
water scarcity (Smith et al. 2012). In this context, urban planning for the reuse and
storage of wastewater, ﬂood or rainwater, building, road and pavement construc-
tion, building water network systems, building roof design, the researchs of new
technologies to beneﬁt from wastewater, rainwater and seawater have accelerated. In
addition, efforts to reduce greenhouse gases and increase forest areas and green areas
to combat drought have triggered the idea that the world should be built and greened
in accordance with its natural geography, and designs compatible with nature have
begun to be preferred.
The use of energy at every stage of urban drinking and potable water supply (trans-
mission, storage, network, puriﬁcation, disinfection, domestic use) and wastewater
treatment, diversifying energy sources and using renewable energy sources (solar,
wind, geothermal, thermal energy storage techniques, etc.), development of new
water and energy efﬁcient integrated models are important efforts in resilient urban
water management.
274
C. Karakaş Ulusoy
5
Conclusions
In this study, how to ensure the drinkability of tap water is examined as the primary
objective and its relationship with sustainable development as the secondary objec-
tive.Primarily,Itisextremelyimportanttoreducetheuseofbottledwaterfordrinking
purposes within the framework of reducing plastic pollution and chemical pollution,
reusing waste and protecting natural resources. In order to avoid using bottled water,
the drinkability rate of tap water should be increased. it is seen that planning the
distribution of water is as important as its production in providing potable water
from fountains in urban drinking water service provision. However, it is known that
in practice, in expanding cities, the drinking water needs of the whole city are gener-
ally met from the central conventional drinking water treatment facility with pipes
of different diameters, lengths, materials and ages. This ﬁnding is important as it
shows that the distribution network design was made without considering its impact
on water quality. Should the aim be to be able to run water from fountains or to drink
water ﬂowing from fountains? If the choice is to drink water ﬂowing from fountains,
the urban planning approach must be completely changed, as well as the existing
centralized conventional water infrastructure planning approach.
Providing the physical, chemical and biological conditions for potable water to
ﬂow from fountains can be possible with multi-dimensional, multi-disciplinary, inte-
grated planning and studies based on scientiﬁc foundations, from the source to the
fountain. In this context, it is important to be able to predict current and future risks
and take the necessary precautions quickly. For this, a detailed analysis of the envi-
ronmental, economic, political and managerial dimensions of the transition from
existing single-centered conventional systems to ﬂexible, multi-centered, diverse,
small and changeable systems should be undertaken as soon as possible.
Secondarily, in efforts to adapt to climate change and sustainable development; It
is considered that providing urban water service in a sustainable way is only possible
with multi-centered, ﬂexible, multi-source, multi-disciplinary integrated urban water
infrastructure system planning, based on a nature-based, nature-respecting, water-
sensitive urban planning approach that protects intergenerational equality, is resistant
to climate change.
References
Alegre H, Covas D (2015) Integrated planning of urban water services: a global approach. TRUST
Manual of Best Practice, vol 1
Baran B (2020) Plastic waste as a challenge for sustainable development and circularity in the
European Union. Ekonomia i Prawo. Econ Law 19(1):7–20. https://doi.org/10.12775/EiP.202
0.001
Bilalova S, Newig J, Charles L, Lévesque T, Roux J, Herron C, Crane S (2023) Pathways to water
sustainability? a global study assessing the beneﬁts of integrated water resources management.
J Environ Manag 343:118179. Elsevier
The Importance of Being Returned from Bottled Water to Tap Water …
275
Brattebø H, Alegre H, Cabrera Jr. E, Marques R.C, Hein A, Carlos Oliveira Cruz CO (2013) A
master framework for UWCS sustainability.TRUST
Brown RR, Farelly MA (2009) Delivering sustainable urban water management: a review of the
hurdles we face. Water Sci Technol 59(5):839–846
Brown RR, Keath N, Wong THF (2009) Urban water management in cities: historical, current and
future regime. Water Sci Technol 59(5):847–855
Candelleri A, Conti D, Archetti F (2014) A graph based analysis of leak localization in urban water
networks. Procedia Eng 70:228–237
Capelo M, Brentan B, Monteiro L, Covas D (2021) Near–real time burst location and sizing in water
distribution systems using artiﬁcial neural networksin in water 13,1841:23. https://doi.org/10.
3390/w13131841
Creacoa E, Franchinia M (2014) Low level hybrid procedure for the multi-objective design of water
distribution networks. Procedia Eng 70:369–378
Der V (2015) Optimization approaches for planning and operation of large-scale water distribution
networks. Dissertation, urn:nbn:de:gbv:Ilm1-2015000456, p 163
Fish K, Osborn AM, Boxall JB (2017) Bioﬁlm structures (EPS and bacterial communities) in
drinking water distribution systems are conditioned by hydraulics and inﬂuence discolouration
in science of total environment. Elsevier, pp 571–580
Gambino I, Bagordo F, Grassi T, Panico A, De Donno A (2022) Occurrence of microplastics in tap
and bottledwater: current knowledge. Int J Environ Res Public Health 19:5283. https://doi.org/
10.3390/ijerph19095283
Guo M, Tan CL,Wu L, Peng J, Ren R, Chiu C-H (2021) Determinants of ıntention to purchase
bottled water based on business online strategy in china: the role of perceived risk in the theory
of planned behavior. Int J Environ Res Public Health 18:10729. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph
182010729
Harald H (2005) Options for sustainable urban water ınfrastucture systems: the AKWA-2100
scenarios. Karlsruhei Germany, Publication by ınstitue of environmental technology and
sustainable development Korea University, Seoul, Korea, pp 1–15
Ingemarsson ML, Weinberg J, Rudebeck T, Erlandsson LW (2022) The essential drop to
reach net-zero: unpacking freshwater’s role in climate change mitigation. Stockholm ınter-
national water ınstitute, Stockholm resilience centre, Potsdam ınstitute of climate ımpact
research, United Nations Development Programme and Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale
Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH
Kazancı N, Alkut A, Emine G (2018) Kanlıgöl ve Ankara’nın Kent Kimliğini Oluşturabilecek
Yerbilimsel Özellikler. Ankara Araştırma Dergisi 6(1):97–109
Liu G, Zhang Y, Knibbe W, Feng C, Liu W, Medema G, Meer W (2017a) Potential impacts
of changing supply-water quality on drinking water distribution: a review in water research.
Elsevier, pp 135–148
Liu G, Tao Y, Zhang Y, Lut M, Knibbe W, Wielen P, Liu W, Medema G, Meer W (2017b)
Hotspots for selected metal elements and microbes accumulation and the corresponding water
quality deterioration potential in an unchlorinated drinking water distribution system. Water Res
124:435–445
Luqman A, Nugrahapraja H, Wahyuono RA, Islami I, Haekal MH, Fardiansyah Y, Putri BQ, Amal-
ludin FI, Roﬁqa EA, Götz F et al (2021) Microplastic contamination in human stools, foods,
and drinking water associated with Indonesian coastal population. Environments 8:138
Marques RC, Leeuwen KV (2012) Current state of sustainability of urban water cycle services,
Part I, D11.1—towards a baseline assessment of the sustainability of urban water cycle services.
Trust
Makropoulos C, Rozos E, Bruaset S, Frijns J, Zouwen M (2012) Best practices for sustainable
urban water cycle systems an overview of and enabling and constraining factors for a transition
to sustainable UWCSs. TRUST
Moerman A, Blokker M, Vreeburg J, Hoek JP (2014) Drinking water temperature modelling in
domestic systems. Procedia Eng 89:143
276
C. Karakaş Ulusoy
Miller F, Bolitho A, Jamieson N, Catmur C, Hurlimann A, Bowen K (2014) A plan to push limits?
investigating the ecologically sustainable development dimensions of melbourne’s central region
sustainable water strategy. Aust Geogr 45(1):19–20
Nottarp-Heim D, Wolf M, Helena A, Andreas H, Aine G (2015) Transition to sustainable urban
water services of tomorrow: a handbook for policy makers. TRUST Manual 2
NRC (2006) Drinking water distribution systems: assessing and reducing risks. National Academies
Press
NYC (2010) Environmental protection strategy 2011–2014
Nguyen C, Elﬂand C, Edwards M (2012) Impact of advenced water conservation features and new
copper pipe on rapid chloramine decay and microbial regrowth. Water Res 38(6):1457–1466
Radhakrishnan V, Wu W (2020) IoT TECHNOLOGY FOR SMART WATER SYStem
Rhodes CJ (2018) Plastic pollution and potential solutions. Sci Prog 101(3):207–260. https://doi.
org/10.3184/003685018X15294876706211
Savic D (2005) Coping with risk and uncertainty in urban water ınfrastructure rehabilitation
planning. Acqua e Cıttà - I Convegno Nazıonale dı Idraulıca Urbana
Shahanas M, Sivakumar B (2016) Framework for a smart water management system in the context
of smart city initiatives In India. Procedia Comput Sci 92:142–147
Smith H, Ramôa AR, Galvao A, Monterio AJ, Jeffrey P (2012) Review on ﬂexible UWCS and
transition pathways. TRUST Deliverable D12.1
Souza EV, Silva MAC (2014) Management system for improving the efﬁciency of use water systems
water supply. Procedia Eng 70:458–466
Spuhler D, Germann V, Kassa K, Ketema AA, Sherpa AM, Sherpa MG, Maurer M, Luthi C, Langer-
graber G (2020) Developing sanitation planning options: a tool for systematic consideration of
novel technologies and systems in J Environ Manag 271. Elsevier
Wang H, Edwards MA, Falkinham JO III, Pruden A (2013) Probiotic approach to pathogen control
in premise plumbing systems? A review. Environ Sci Technil 47(18):1070–1078
Uslu A (2009) Sürdürülebilir Yeşil Kent Fikirleri, Örnekleri ve Türkiye İçin Dersler. Doğa, Kent ve
Sürdürülebilirlik. XXI. Uluslararası Yapı ve Yaşam Kongresi. TMMOB Mimarlar Odası Bursa
Şubesi, Bursa, pp 49–58
Villanueva CM, Garfí M, Milà C, Olmos S, Ferrer I, Tonne C (2021) Health and environmental
impacts of drinking water choices in Barcelona, Spain: a modelling study. Sci Total Environ
795:1–10. Elsevier
Yozukmaz A (2022) Detection and public health risk assessment of microplastics in disposable
(PET) bottled water produced and sold locally in the Aegean region. Ege J Fish Aquat Sci
39(4):275–283. https://doi.org/10.12714/egejfas.39.4.02
Zan T, Wong K, Whittle A (2014) Event detection and localization in urban water distribution
network. IEEE Sens J 14:1–13
Demonstrating Energy Transitions
in Micro Industries: Sustainability
of Energy Justice
Mini Govindan, Rashmi Murali, Abhinish Boora, and Amit Kumar Thakur
Abstract Micro-enterprises in India engage a signiﬁcant proportion of formal and
informal employment, including marginalized communities. Initiating and fostering
clean energy transitions in this sector throws open a plethora of challenges and
opportunities. Faced with barriers of low productivity, poor wages, and inaccessi-
bility to credit and inadequate energy inputs, clean energy transition, which receives
the support of the national government, philanthropies and other private players,
offers transformative growth to the enterprises, while ensuring energy justice and
inclusivity. However, despite a growing interest to adopt renewable energy tech-
nologies, such as solar, the inherent vulnerability of these communities renders
these enterprises risk-averse, and there is a sense of trepidation and apprehension.
The fear of incurring debt and the possibility of credit risks loom large. With the
objective to address these challenges, an on-going initiative- Sustainable Energy
in Micro-enterprises for Income and Livelihood Enhancement (SMILE)- adopts a
practical pathway based on the demonstration effect, wherein relatively larger and
more stable micro-enterprises, which exhibit greater propensity to undertake trans-
formative endeavours, were chosen as pioneers for change. By empowering these
enterprises with renewable energy technologies and showcasing the tangible beneﬁts
that ensue, the success of the demonstration projects showcased to the marginalised
communities, the positive impact on productivity, reliability, and cost savings. The
initial reservations were gradually replaced with newfound conviction and eagerness
to embrace sustainable energy solutions, leading to a spillover effect on neighbouring
microenterprises. This paper explores the interplay of demonstration and spillover
effects as a powerful tool for ensuring the sustainability of energy justice.
M. Govindan · R. Murali (B)
The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI), New Delhi, India
e-mail: ashmi.murali@teri.res.in
M. Govindan
e-mail: gmini@teri.res.in
A. Boora · A. K. Thakur
School of Economics University, Bengaluru, India
e-mail: akthakur@teri.res.in
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_17
277
278
M. Govindan et al.
Keywords Energy transition · Micro-enterprises · Demonstration · Spillover
1
Introduction
Developing economies like India are driven by Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
(MSMEs) whose contribution to formal and informal employment generation and
stimulating local economies in rural and peri-urban areas has been immense. India’s
vibrant MSME landscape has been a strong contributor to macroeconomic indica-
tors like Gross Domestic Product (GDP), wherein MSMEs held a share of around
29% in 2021–22. Further the sector’s contribution to manufacturing and exports, at
36 and 43% (2021–22) respectively, serves to strengthen India’s position as a glob-
ally competent economy (Press Information Bureau 2023). Another relatively less
highlighted facet of MSMEs is their role in preserving several traditional arts and
indigenous crafts, practiced by cottage industries and artisans, whose livelihoods
depend on it. Appropriately titled as ‘Engines of Growth,’ the MSME sector has
received a strong push from policy makers in the form of supportive schemes for
ﬁnancial, technological, marketing assistance.
In spite of the immense potential and prospects presented by the sector, chal-
lenges still persist when it comes to infrastructure gaps, accessing credit, availing
government assistance, and sustaining their businesses in the face of market and
supply chain ﬂuctuations. The micro-enterprise sector within MSMEs, accounting
for around 99% of all MSMEs, is particularly vulnerable to challenges, especially
those of infrastructure including energy inputs. Reliability and quality of electricity
supply are critical parameters for seamless production activities in the enterprises,
and gaps in electricity supply cause disruptions in production, leading to added costs
of back-up supply, additional labour costs and compromised product quality. Afford-
ability of electricity also becomes an impediment when micro-enterprises attempt
to mechanise and expand their production processes. Overall, energy becomes a
deciding factor for the viability and sustainability of micro-enterprises.
Inthisscenario,MSMEscouldgreatlybeneﬁtfromatransitiontocleanenergythat
addresses the issues with affordability and reliability of supply. The government’s
focus on expanding India’s renewable energy capacities to 500 GW by 2030 opens
up immense opportunities for MSMEs to beneﬁt from the transition to enhance their
business operations, as well as opens doors for the creation of new businesses in
the energy supply chain. By achieving energy transitions in the MSME sector, the
country could conﬁdently progress towards an environmentally sustainable economy.
To ensure that the transition is ‘just’, its beneﬁts should be accessible to all sections
of the society, including the marginalised. However, energy justice is a complex
process, intrinsically linked to factors that go beyond energy access, but take into
account social, economic, cultural and behavioural facets and the accompanying
barriers. Moving in this direction would require support and mentoring that goes
beyond policy mandated physical assistance, to an ecosystem of supportive inputs
that build an equitable and resilient environment for business growth. Stakeholders
Demonstrating Energy Transitions in Micro Industries: Sustainability …
279
including the private sector, non-governmental agencies and philanthropies carry the
motivation and the resources that could transform the landscape of MSMEs. They
can foster innovation, strengthen the supply chain, and provide handholding and
capacities to struggling MSMEs to adopt sustainable business practices through the
just transition pathway.
Acceptance of new technologies for business requires time and an assurance
of minimal risks. Demonstrating innovative approaches and customised techno-
commercial models designed to meet the requirements of micro-enterprises would
go a long way in developing conﬁdence in adopting a new technology. An attempt in
this direction was made by an on-going philanthropy-supported programme- Sustain-
able Energy in Micro-enterprises for Income and Livelihood Enhancement (SMILE).
Implemented by The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI) supported by the IKEA
Foundation, SMILE aims to facilitate the deployment of energy efﬁcient renew-
able energy technologies to empower productive utilization in micro-enterprises in
India. With a comprehensive but pragmatic approach, interventions under SMILE
include technical assistance, devising ﬁnancial instruments, supporting market link-
ages, forging new partnerships, and up-skilling entrepreneurs. Numerous micro-
enterprise clusters were identiﬁed for pilot demonstrations, primarily concentrated
in Uttar Pradesh, one of the top contributing states to the MSME sector in India.
Notably, Uttar Pradesh is one of the most economically challenged and technolog-
ically marginalized regions in India, which has been on a path of economic growth
and technology adoption in recent times. The clusters in Uttar Pradesh where the
SMILE programme was implemented include the Brassware cluster in Moradabad,
Silk-weaving clusters in Varanasi, and the Moonj rope-making clusters in Amethi and
Sultanpur districts. This paper explores the interplay of demonstration and spillover
effects as a powerful tool for ensuring the sustainability of energy justice, in the
context of the Moonj cluster.
2
SMILE Programme Background
The Moonj rope making cluster derives its name from the ﬁbre obtained from a
perennial species of wild grass called Saccharum Munja, locally known as ‘Sarpat
Ghas,’ which is found in the low lands along the banks of the Gomti River. Making
ropes and handicrafts from Moonj ﬁbres is a traditional art practiced by the ﬁshing
communities in the districts Amethi, Sultanpur, Prayagraj and Ambedkar Nagar.
The SMILE programme identiﬁed this cluster to be unique in artistry and least
developed in terms of technological interventions. Since most of the production work
is done manually even today, the cluster offered immense scope for mechanisation
and electriﬁcation through a clean energy source.
Of late, the popularity of Moonj products has been on the rise with the promotion
of sustainable lifestyles and organic products. A few urban craft and home décor
designers have promoted modern designs with the traditional weaving methods,
giving the products a contemporary appeal. Moreover, Moonj is endorsed by the
280
M. Govindan et al.
Table 1 System conﬁguration for solar rope-twisting machine
Model
Rope-twisting
machine
capacity
Solar
panel
capacity
Battery
capacity
(total)
Number
of
batteries
System
voltage
MPPT Charge
controller
Hours of
operation
Off-Grid
0.5 HP
670 Wp
3.6 kWh
lead acid
tubular
battery
Two 150
AH
battery
24 V
1
5
government’s One District One Product (ODOP) scheme that promotes a unique
product from each district of the states of India through marketing support.
Primary research in the cluster revealed that rope making was a home-based
activity involving family members, where tasks were divided among the men and
women. While harvesting the grass, beating, extracting the ﬁbres was done by the
men, women took up rope twisting and weaving to create baskets and other household
items. Interestingly, only the rope was sold in the markets, whereas other products
were given as gifts during weddings. Weaving baskets was done by women at their
convenience in their free time, and it had not been commercialised. Mechanising the
production activities using clean energy could gradually help with commercialising
the cluster and make it a key contributor to the household income, which presently
was dependent on agriculture and small-scale ﬁshing, followed by casual labour
work, sometimes in other cities.
Based on a baseline technical and socio-economic survey under the SMILE
programme, an off-grid solar photovoltaic model was designed for the cluster that
could support the operation of rope twisting machines. The machines were intended
to alleviate the drudgery involved in manual rope-twisting and increase the pace and
volume of rope production. The technical model comprised a 670 Watt-peak solar
panel that would charge two batteries of 150 Ampere-hour, which in turn would run a
rope-twisting machine of 0.5 Horsepower (Table 1). The system could operate for 5 h
of peak sunlight, which also coincided with the usual working hours for households
in the villages. The modularity of the system provided the ﬂexibility to increase the
solar capacity as well as add more machines as the volume of production increased.
The combined solar and rope-twisting machine system cost around INR 175,000
(USD 2101),1 of which the community was expected to pay 50%, that is INR 87,500
(USD 1051), and the rest was supported by the SMILE programme. Understanding
the socio-economic challenges faced by the community, extensive community mobil-
isation activities and awareness drives were conducted under the programme. Locally
stationed ﬁeld staff held regular interactions with various stakeholders in the villages-
both men and women- to familiarise them with SMILE and the prospective beneﬁts
towards livelihood augmentation. Since, the objective of the SMILE programme was
to give voice to the marginalised sections of society and make them key actors in
the energy transition landscape; the mobilisation activities primarily prioritised the
involvement of socio- economically poorer households in the clusters. To exhibit
1 1 INR = 0.012 USD.
Demonstrating Energy Transitions in Micro Industries: Sustainability …
281
the working of the technology, pilot models were demonstrated in several villages.
The community was invited to try their hand at running the machines, and verify
the quality of the rope produced. They were also made aware of options for ﬁnan-
cial assistance, considering their economic challenges. Support for market linkages
was also offered to the community members, as many of them had not thought of
selling Moonj products other than ropes. In the course of the project, TERI also
partnered with two local non-governmental organizations- Omkar Seva Sansthan in
Amethi and Moonj Craft in Sultanpur districts. These NGOs primarily work with
local women to support them in enhancing their livelihoods, in addition to working in
various welfare domains of health, education, youth affairs, legal and human rights,
and housing among others.
It is however documented that many technologies that could spur considerable
increase in welfare, economy and environment are often adopted at low rates even
when donors, researchers and civil society have invested their effort in them heavily
(Parks et al. 2016). Hence, this article aims to address some questions that are of
particular importance to policy makers and donors and project implementers- (a) Can
demonstration effect act as a potential driver in challenging existing regimes in rural
societies for promoting low carbon technologies for productive use?, and (b) What
are the factors and conditions that drive demonstration effect of such technologies?
3
Utilising the Demonstration Effect to Move the Needle
on Rural Energy Transition
The research landscape surrounding rural energy transitions in micro-industries is
multifaceted, encompassing a variety of crucial aspects of social dynamics and
community energy models in the context of the demonstration effect. Coined in 1949
by the noted American economist J. S. Duesenberry in the paper Income, Saving and
the Theory of Consumer Behaviour, the demonstration effect was propounded as a
phenomenon concerning a Relative Income Hypothesis (Duesenberry 1949), which
described the tendency of lower income households to imitate and compete with their
higher income counterparts in the community, in terms of consumption behaviours
(Dwivedi 2015). This pattern could be seen as disruptive to lower income entities
(households, societies, countries), where imitative consumption trumps savings and
as a result impedes capital formation in certain cases, and thus the demonstration
effect could be discouraged (Adhikari 2022). However, alternate applications of the
demonstration effect that actuates positive adoption of socio-economically beneﬁcial
instruments is highly desirable and the subject of the present paper.
Energy transitions in India over the past decades have occurred over a lab-to-
ﬁeld approach, often mandated by policy, where new renewable energy designs have
been tested and customised through pilot demonstrations in real world conditions.
In addition to improving the technical parameters of these models and developing
new technologies for climate action, demonstrating amongst the community has
282
M. Govindan et al.
been instrumental in generating curiosity and anticipation for alternative affordable
energy solutions. Testing various technological models are essential for anticipating
and mitigating technical, market and institutional uncertainties and challenges that
emerge from new technology deployment, thus evolving a broader socio-technical
system (Hendry et al. 2010; Hellsmark et al. 2016). However, there are examples
of where demonstrations without technology ‘readiness’ may not have achieved the
desired outcomes, despite supportive incentives for its adoption (Frankel 1986). Thus
the important aspect of assessing technical and economic feasibility of technologies
through demonstration models must not be overlooked, as the learning gathered
could determine the prospect of future commercialisation and scale-up (Degiorgis
et al. 2007; Gocht et al. 1988; Nguyen et al. 1996).
While literature demarcates demonstration models or plants into those for estab-
lishing technical viability and others that promote ‘exemplars’ for adoption (Karl-
ström and Sandén 2004; Magill and Rogers 1981), the present study of technology
demonstration in the Moonj cluster is an amalgamation of both approaches, where
technical feasibility is established in concurrence with socio-economic beneﬁts,
contributing to relatively quicker adoption and future scale-up.
However, demonstrating and then upscaling sustainable energy programmes
requires a supportive ecosystem anchored on factors like government support,
industry-academia collaboration, market forces and investments. Demonstrations
also form the basis of transformative upscaling where demonstrated break out tech-
nologiesscaleupfromnichemarketstoregularmarkets(Bossinketal.2023).Further,
a deeper understanding of the role of ‘actor networks’ in demonstration projects is
also advocated by studies (Frishammar et al. 2015).
Finally, one of the most signiﬁcant opportunities presented by demonstration
projects in sustainable energy is that of capturing learning and insights on technical,
marketing organisational and policy aspects of energy transitions and future research
(Bossink 2017).
4
Methodology
A case study approach was adopted, which included various data gathering tools to
collect both primary and secondary data. It has been noted that case study approach is
helpful in theory development, generation of new evidence and hypothesis testing and
also provides a detailed consideration of the contextual factors for a research study
which are different from statistical analysis (George and Bennet 2004). (Gerring
2006)arguesthatanalysingatypicalcaseisusefulinordertoextensivelycomprehend
and explain a particular phenomenon. However, ﬁndings from a case study cannot
be generalised and hence it should be noted that case studies can provide depth and
thickness of understanding, despite sacriﬁcing the generalisability (Sartori 1991).
Fieldwork was conducted between February and November 2023 in the selected
Moonj micro-enterprise clusters, in Sultanpur district of Uttar Pradesh, India, along-
side a desk review of relevant studies, reports and publications. To examine the
Demonstrating Energy Transitions in Micro Industries: Sustainability …
283
phenomenon of demonstration effect, the following types of micro-clusters were
considered:
• Large enterprises who have willingly taken up the technology to be demonstrated
as pilot project
• Small enterprises and individual artisans/households who were initially reluctant,
but after seeing the success of pilot demonstration have adopted the technology.
Both these enterprises have a few things in common—they are situated in rural
areas, they have erratic power supply but still pay high electricity rates and have
not been part of any renewable energy projects in the past either by the government
or the private sector including civil society organisations and philanthropies. The
larger enterprises however, had an edge over the small enterprises in their volume of
production and access to markets, ﬁnance and resources. The smaller enterprises and
the households involved in making Moonj products were composed of low income
households and limited access to ﬁnance and resources.
In order to understand and analyse the factors that led to the adoption of the tech-
nology primarily by the large enterprises, even though the program was prioritised
for marginalized and low income households, in-depth key stakeholder interviews,
site visits, walk-throughs and community observations were carried out during the
ﬁeldwork. Efforts were made to understand the causal mechanism of the demonstra-
tion effect on the smaller enterprise. In this study, as we describe and analyse the
nature of demonstration effect, we also paid attention to the characteristics, patterns
and challenges that are associated with it.
The interviewees were selected through a combination of purposive and snow-
balling methods. In total, 30 in-depth interviews were conducted with the following
types of respondents—households engaged in Moonj work, the head and ofﬁce
bearers of the NGOs working in the clusters (Moonj Craft and Omkar Seva Sansthan),
women working in the clusters, technology providers, village leaders and subject
experts. The interviews were transcribed, and the data gathered were categorised
into themes and sub-themes for content analysis.
Although, guided by relevant literature and ﬁndings from the ﬁeld, this paper
is meant to be exploratory and open to generating new ideas and explanations on
the inﬂuence of demonstration effect in addressing the challenges or lessons for
future policy or project interventions on renewable energy adoption in other rural
communities.
5
Demonstration Effect as a Potential Driver
in Challenging Existing Regimes
The communities engaged in Moonj rope making in Amethi and Sultanpur districts
rank low on several developmental indicators, with around 30% of the population
of Amethi and 22% of the population of Sultanpur being multidimensionally poor
284
M. Govindan et al.
(Government of Uttar Pradesh 2023). Limited education, especially among women
and the youth, has severely constrained their livelihoods. Agriculture continues to be
the mainstay of the economy, supported in some regions by small-scale inland ﬁshing.
Other local jobs include tiny businesses like petty shops. Seasonal migration of men
to cities is common, where casual labour or odd jobs in small private ﬁrms become
an additional income source, alongside agriculture in the villages. Women in the
community largely remain occupied with household responsibilities and agriculture.
The Moonj grass is abundantly available in the villages, growing wild along river
banks, which is seasonally harvested by men, and processed further by women.
Traditionally, Moonj grass was used to insulate roofs of houses or to create boundary
walls. As other uses of the grass evolved, women predominantly undertook manual
rope twisting, which was a laborious and time-consuming process. Weaving other
household products such as baskets, mats, containers, and bags, among others, are
done by women in their leisure time along with household chores. Reportedly, around
150,000 people are engaged in working with materials made of Moonj in Sultanpur
district (National Skill Development Council 2021).The meagre income earned from
making and selling Moonj ropes in the local markets hardly meets the needs of the
household, and is not regarded as a formal income source. This background enabled
the cluster to be chosen for interventions under SMILE, as the programme aimed
to beneﬁt the poorest of the poor and marginalised sections of the society, facing
socio-cultural, economic and gender-based disparities, through technology imple-
mentation and other supportive measures. The programme also envisaged creating
pathways for the community to improve their visibility in the markets and promote
their products beyond local bazars, by creating awareness, conducting trainings and
utilising exhibitions, fairs and online sales platforms.
It is well noted that supporting renewable energy demonstration projects to spread
information and create awareness in remote areas, training microﬁnance leaders and
decentralising the implementation of such projects may foster renewable energy
adoption (Kochtcheeva 2016). Such actions would also help build a better equipped
sustainable renewable industry, generate proﬁts and create jobs, alongside increasing
efﬁciency in ﬁnancing (Mohiuddin 2006; MacLeod et al. 2015). Hence, extensive
awareness drives were conducted which generated signiﬁcant curiosity for solar
technology amongst the community. The prospect of mechanising the process of rope
twisting found favour with the women who appreciated the potential time savings.
The possibility of increased productivity and more volume of production brought
with it the hope of a better livelihood, which was attractive to the community.
Due to the relatively high upfront costs of most technologies, having access
to ﬁnance is considered to be an important prerequisite for their adoption
(Brunnschweiler 2010; Huenteler and Schmidt 2014). Hence, the SMILE programme
offered to support up to ﬁfty per cent of the system costs and the rest was to be
contributed by the community. However, owing to their poor economic situation,
affording the systems became challenging. Paying the cost upfront or even in instal-
ments was difﬁcult for them given their low disposable incomes. In addition, the
community showed apprehensions regarding the functioning of the solar system,
which was, in a way, alien to them, as they had not seen any applications of solar
Demonstrating Energy Transitions in Micro Industries: Sustainability …
285
in their villages. According to some studies, in many rural populations, a lack of
awareness of solar products is a major obstacle in developing the solar energy market
(Rebane and Barham 2011; Halder 2016). In a study conducted by Urpelainen and
Yoon (2015), it was found that rural households in Uttar Pradesh, were unaware
of even solar home systems (Urpelainen and Yoon 2015). This led to less demand
for solar products, especially in energy-poor rural areas. Moonj harvesting being a
seasonal activity, the community was concerned with the utility of the system in the
lean season, since the system was not designed to power their household appliances
due to cost constraints. Another aspect highlighted was that despite their interest
in using machines to ease the manual labour of rope-twisting, the women had not
operated any machines before. The shift from a leisurely activity to running a formal
commercial enterprise was overwhelming for the rural women, who had no previous
experience of such work.
Various efforts were made in this cluster to enable affordability for the poten-
tial beneﬁciaries. However, their aversion to taking ﬁnancial risks proved to be a
hindrance. It is a natural tendency to be averse of risks and prefer outcomes with low
uncertainty over those with high uncertainty. In the current context, certain factors
have led to this risk aversion among the community, such as their inherent vulnera-
bility, poor ﬁnancial condition, present economic status, market situation, and lack of
awareness and skills regarding the technology. For instance, linkages with rural banks
were proposed to the artisans for availing loans to afford the system cost. This was
however, met with resistance, as the fear of incurring debt which they may not be able
to repay given their small scale of operation loomed large. The possibility of ﬁnancial
instability made them hesitant to undertake potentially transformative but uncertain
and unheard-of endeavours. Given that the other costs involved in the production
are minimal, investing in a new technology through loans did not seem proﬁtable
to the community. On the ﬂip side, even banks considered these unorganised micro-
enterprises to be high risk in terms of payment defaults and credibility and hesitated
to provide them business loans, unless mandated by a government scheme. Studies
have noted that bankers cited lack of awareness and uncertain techno-commercial
viability of proposals relating to solar-powered livelihood appliances as key concerns
(Jha et al. 2019).
The other option presented to the community was to avail subsidies or ﬁnancial
assistance under government schemes such as Mudra Loans,2 designed to support
technology infusion in the MSME sector including solar installations. This too was
notattractivetothecommunityaslackofawarenessofschemes,immensepaperwork,
and long waiting times gave the impression of a cumbersome and laborious process.
They were of the belief that the time spent on availing scheme beneﬁts may take away
from their livelihood as they lose days of productive work. Further, the presence of
severalGovernmentschemesonsolartechnologyliketherecentSuryaGharscheme,3
2 The Pradhan Mantri Mudra Yojana (PMMY) is a Central Government scheme to extend affordable
credit to micro and small enterprises.
3 PM Surya Ghar Muft Bijlee Yojana provides free electricity of up to 300 units per month to
households that opt for solar rooftop systems.
286
M. Govindan et al.
distort the value of initiatives like SMILE by sending asymmetric information into
the community and inﬂuencing their decision making, as they expected to receive
free of cost or highly subsidised systems.
The SMILE programme was designed with the understanding that the accep-
tance of any new technology takes time, and always comes with a cost. The path
towards large scale adoption of a potentially transformative technology would require
customisation of the technology to suit the enterprise needs, demonstration of the
beneﬁts, and ﬁnancial investment. With the barriers and apprehensions presented in
the Moonj cluster, the SMILE programme modiﬁed its approach to a more inno-
vative yet practical pathway. Instead of promoting the intervention amongst the
smallest individual entrepreneurs in the community as planned earlier, larger and
relatively more stable micro-enterprises or groups of entrepreneurs were identiﬁed
for piloting the interventions. These enterprises exhibited a greater propensity to
undertake transformative endeavours, given their ﬁnancial strength, experience of
running businesses and a better understanding of the prospects to improve the gap
in their business methods. Energy was seen by them as a crucial input to improve
productivity, and solar was seen to provide affordable, reliable and long-term energy
security for their enterprise operations. The maturity and modularity offered by solar
technology added to its value in terms of contributing to expanding the business in
the future. By empowering these enterprises with renewable energy technologies and
showcasing the tangible beneﬁts that ensue, these larger enterprises could potentially
turn out to be compelling examples for their marginalized counterparts.
The SMILE programme, with a renewed strategy identiﬁed larger players in the
Moonj cluster who had a good standing amongst the community and had taken
measures to commercialise Moonj products with the support of existing government
schemes. Two such civil society organisations- Omkar Seva Sansthan and Moonj
Craft- worked closely with local women to engage them in livelihood augmenta-
tion activities. While Omkar Seva Sansthan was a small NGO that newly ventured
into the Moonj business, Moonj Craft was a larger established player in the market,
which operated on the cooperative model where groups of women contributed their
skills to developing Moonj products. Women were trained by the NGOs in crafting
good quality, diverse Moonj articles like bags, containers, furniture, home décor, etc.,
ready to be sold to consumers. Government support for these organisations came in
the form of infrastructure support, like a small building that served as a training
centre cum work space (at Moonj Craft Sultanpur), access to training programmes,
and representation in government-promoted fairs. In addition, these organisations
received orders for products from various government agencies. In a bid to commer-
cialise their operations further, and promote women-led livelihood activities, efforts
were made to market these products in exhibitions in large cities, and make use
of online marketing platforms. These efforts have helped women realise the worth
of their craftsmanship, improved their conﬁdence, and helped them command fair
remuneration for their labour.
When the SMILE programme was introduced in the larger cooperative (Moonj
Craft), the interventions received a positive response from the women who were keen
tolearntheworkingsofthenewmachinesandtechnology.Theyunderstoodtheutility
Demonstrating Energy Transitions in Micro Industries: Sustainability …
287
of the machines in easing their task, and appreciated solar as an energy source as
opposed to conventional electricity. The group model eased the affordability. The
SMILE team conducted demonstrations of the systems to familiarise the women
with the operations, and also trained them on the management of the solar systems
installed. The overall success of the initiative in the cooperatives helped spread the
word on the beneﬁts of mechanising the rope twisting activity and an affordable and
reliable energy source in the form of solar.
In this situation, the demonstration effect came into play which led to gener-
ating awareness and interest in this new technology, which also had a transformative
potential. A ripple effect was created in the community which took inspiration from
a large organisation like Moonj Craft and saw the prospects of commercialising their
craft supported by solar technology provisioned under SMILE. The newly generated
demand for solar rope-twisting machines came largely from the smaller NGO Omkar
Seva Sansthan, individual households and women who were not directly part of the
cooperative group (Fig. 1). These were also the artisans who held apprehensions on
the technology and its perceived risks, but observing the successful demonstration
of the systems, their trepidations paved the way for curiosity and an aspiration for
better quality of life. They recognised the livelihood opportunity in selling ropes in
the local market and other products like baskets to the cooperatives for a negotiated
price. Despite being marginalised and having a poor economic situation, the demon-
stration effect created from the success of the interventions for the larger players,
instilled a sense of conﬁdence in the community and smaller players to push their
boundaries and take up entrepreneurship.
Fig. 1 Inﬂuence of demonstration effect on technology adoption
288
M. Govindan et al.
6
Factors Inﬂuencing Demonstration Effect
The SMILE programme laid strategic emphasis on inspiring micro-enterprises
through exemplars, and set in motion a virtuous cycle, where a ‘Spillover Effect’
could be observed. Energized by the successes of the pioneering enterprises, neigh-
bouring marginalised microenterprises were emboldened to adopt renewable energy
interventions, creating a momentum that permeated throughout the micro-enterprise
cluster. The positive spillovers of the demonstration were both spatial and social in
nature. Spatial spillover effect was seen in similar geographies that were keen to
implement similar projects (Wang et al. 2023). As Omkar Seva Sansthan and Moonj
Craft connected women’s groups from several villages in the districts of Amethi and
Sultanpur, the positive word-of-mouth in their respective villages generated demand
for solar systems in geographically similar set-ups through a sense of relatability. A
social spillover effect was seen in the hints of changes in the way the community
viewed technology as a tool for economic development as well as for the participation
and upliftment of marginalised sections, including women (Fang et al. 2023). Whilst
it is understood that social changes take time and are inﬂuenced by several factors,
the potential of sustainable transition technologies in initiating social changes cannot
be ignored.
Upon critical examination, the cycle of demonstration and spillover effects in the
current context are guided by some glaring factors. Primarily, direct evidence of the
technical performance of the system was available for the community to witness.
Exposure visits were conducted for micro-entrepreneurs to the installation sites to
viewtheactualworkingofthesystems.Manydoubtsorapprehensionsweregenerally
quickly dispelled through the visits and interactions with system installers. The next
most important factor was the ﬁnancial viability of the technology. The support
from the SMILE programme and the relatively low costs of individual small solar
rope twisting machines helped nudge interested micro-entrepreneurs to make the
small investment for sustained future returns and enhanced livelihood opportunities.
Additional support from SMILE in the form of training programmes, reliable after-
sales services, guarantee and warranty on equipment and presence of SMILE ﬁeld
coordinators at the project sites expedited the technology adoption.
Another crucial factor was the strong presence and reputation of the organisations
Omkar Seva Sansthan and Moonj Craft in the villages. The peer groups developed
through these organisations were a platform for women to collectively work towards
improving their livelihood, while sharing their problems and joys with fellow women
from the villages. The barriers faced by individual women in taking up entrepreneur-
ship in addition to their household responsibilities got eased with the encouragement
and inspiration from other women who were engaged with these organisations. What
helped further was the prospect for additional family income which found favour
among the men of the household, who then did not hold the women back from
participating. Further instruments of support provided by these organisations such
as assistance for administrative paperwork, school admissions for children, hygienic
work spaces, pick-up and drop facilities from the villages, and the option of working
Demonstrating Energy Transitions in Micro Industries: Sustainability …
289
from home greatly beneﬁtted women and the organisations in maintaining women’s
long-term engagement in the group activities. Hence, women were able to overcome
their socially deﬁned barriers and marginalisation to break their own comfort zones
and contribute ﬁnancially for the welfare of their families.
Over the past two decades, it is widely acknowledged that the inclusion of
techno—economic and environmental appropriateness is critical in the provision
of environmental friendly technology for rural contexts (Pin et al. 2021). In the study
villages, it was revealed that the main factor considered for adoption of solar powered
Moonj rope making technology by both Moonj Craft and Omkar Seva Sansthan and
the individual households hoping to get this technology, is the technical efﬁciency
and economic performance followed by social beneﬁts. The common arguments by
environmental scholars (Talaei et al. 2014) which refers to the roll-out of low carbon
technologiestomaintaintheprogressivedevelopmentofenergy-hungrysectorswhile
also controlling, reducing, and/or preventing anthropogenic greenhouse gas emis-
sions, does not seem to be the main criteria for adoption of the low carbon technology
in the study area.
The head of Omkar Seva Sansthan clearly mentioned that there is a need to
alleviateeconomicconstraintsrelevanttosavings,credit,andotherliquidityissuesfor
stimulating such technology adoption practices in rural enterprises. This means the
renewable energy projects are mainly driven by local concerns and not by any national
policy on environment. Moreover, the choice and scale of projects reﬂects local
opportunities such as affordability, proﬁtability and creation of local employment.
Hence, only the least expensive energy solution that can also satisfy carbon emission
reduction requirements may be at best acceptable to the local community. As noted
by Talaei et al. (2014), technologies claiming to be climate-friendly should ﬁrst be
friendly and acceptable to the surrounding environment.
Director of Moonj Craft which has started commercialising their products opined
that eventually they would like to build the brand as a ‘pro environmental NGO’
and want to present their products and activities having environmental or ‘green
dimension.’
During ﬁeld interactions, he conﬁdently stated that “having a pro environmental
tag will help us in generating more business through better opportunities in exhibi-
tions and fairs. Lifestyle conscious customers are always looking for clean and green
brands.”
In a rural context, the provision of environment-friendly technologies shall
initially go through local barriers typically inherited from the lack of resources.
However, as noticed in the study region and as advocated by certain scholars such as
(Gupt et al. 2003), NGOs play a major role in helping articulating socio-ethical capital
in enhancing knowledge, values, and institutions to foster technological innovations
at the grassroots level. Therefore, in the long run if this pro-environment identity of
the NGO will drive better socio- economic gains, it will deﬁnitely initiate a powerful
Demonstration Effect within the micro-enterprise clusters.
290
M. Govindan et al.
7
Conclusion
The demonstration of low carbon technology in Moonj cluster played a pivotal role
in bridging the gap between concept development and implementation. It provided
a tangible representation of the innovation, highlighting its potential and real-world
value, while giving feedback to reﬁne the technology and guide further development.
This clearly indicated that the success of pilot projects in the larger micro-enterprises
such as the Moonj Craft, accomplished through SHGs, had an unambiguously posi-
tive effect on the smaller micro-enterprises managed by the marginalised communi-
ties and even motivated individual households to install systems. The pilot projects
established itself an effective and continuous source of information dissemination
mechanism which in turn improved the understanding of the technology effects and
its characteristics and lowered the cognitive bias towards such technologies by the
smaller micro enterprises and reduced their uncertainty in revenue expectations and
inﬂuenced their adoption decisions. In this process of diffusion of ideas, the smaller
players imitated the actions of the larger NGO Moonj Craft and its successful SHG
network, who commanded respect and appeared successful. However, these diffusion
mechanisms may operate along behavioural logic such as human capital, personal
preferences,entrepreneurialexperiences,valueperceptions,riskperceptions,govern-
ment schemes, technology training and policy subsidies among others. Moreover,
these factors play out in different time frames, while some effects may be felt imme-
diately, broader shifts in public opinion and societal impression of the beneﬁts of
these technologies may occur over a period of time and become a deciding factor
whether to adopt it and how much to adopt.
Nevertheless, the strategic utilization of the ‘Demonstration Effect’ and ‘Spillover
Effect’ not only expedites the pace of sustainable energy adoption but also enhances
its comprehensiveness within micro-enterprise clusters. By building on the successes
of relatively larger and stable micro-enterprises, the SMILE initiative was able to
achieve its objectives and targets much faster and more comprehensively. Though
it was planned initially to target mostly the micro-enterprises within marginalized
communities, its mid-course correction of demonstrating the pilot in large micro
enterprises has empowered the small players to overcome challenges and take proac-
tive steps to adopt new technologies. This proactive and adaptive approach will not
only push further India’s progress towards its ambitious renewable energy goals but
also provides an opportunity for micro-enterprises from marginalized communities
to participate actively in the country’s transition to sustainable energy. As it is, the
concept of demonstration projects could potentially contribute to the formulation of
public policy by virtually gaining the approval of the community for replication at
scale (Dawson 1977). As the SMILE program advances towards its ultimate goal
of fostering a ‘Just Transition’ for all micro-enterprises, transcending economic and
social boundaries, it serves as a beacon of hope for inclusive growth and sustainable
development. Through such well-targeted initiatives, the SMILE program stands as
a testament to the transformative power of collaboration, innovation, and inclusivity
in India’s journey towards a greener and more sustainable future.
Demonstrating Energy Transitions in Micro Industries: Sustainability …
291
References
Adhikari R (2022) Prevalence of duesenberry’s relative income hypothesis in nepalese economy.
Int Rev Bus Econ 7(1)
Bossink BAG (2017) Demonstrating sustainable energy: a review based model of sustainable energy
demonstration projects. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 77:1349–1362
Bossink B, Blankesteijn ML, Hasanefendic S (2023) Upscaling sustainable energy technology:
from demonstration to transformation. Energy Res Soc Sci 103:103208
Brunnschweiler CN (2010) Finance for renewable energy: an empirical analysis for developing and
transition economies. Environ Dev Econ 15(3):241–274
Dawson JE (1977) Why do demonstration projects? Anthropol Educ Q 8(2):95–105. http://www.
jstor.org/stable/3216414
Degiorgis L, Santarelli M, Calì M (2007) Hydrogen from renewable energy: a pilot plant for thermal
productionand mobility. J Power Sources 171:237–246
Duesenberry JS (1949) Income, saving and the theory of consumption behavior. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge
Dwivedi D (2015) Macoeconomics theory and policy, 4th edn. Mc Graw Hill Education, Pvt. Ltd.,
New Delhi
Fang S, Xu D, Xu LC, Shams H (2023) Does FDI have a social demonstration effect in developing
economies? evidence based on the presence of women-led local ﬁrms. J Int Bus Stud 54:1332–
1350. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41267-023-00604-3
Frankel E (1986) Technology, politics and ideology: the vicissitudes of federal solar policy, 1974–
1983. In: Byrne J (ed) The politics of energy research and development, 1st ed. s.l., Routledge
Frishammar J et al (2015) The role of pilot and demonstration plants in technological development:
synthesis and directions for future research. Technol Anal Strat Manag 27:1–18
George A, Bennet A (2004) Case studies and theory development in social sciences. MIT Press,
Massachussetts
Gerring J (2006) Case study research: principles and practices. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge
Gocht W et al (1988) Decentralized desalination of brackish water by a directly coupled reverse-
osmosis-photovoltaic-system: a pilot plant plant study in Jordan. Renew Energy 14:287–292
Government of Uttar Pradesh (2023) Multidimensional poverty index. District wise analysis,
Uttar Pradesh. https://epariyojana.up.gov.in/SdgCIF/PDF/Analysis_Note/MPI_UP_Districtw
ise%20Analysis_UNDP.pdf. Government of Uttar Pradesh
Gupt A et al (2003) Mobilizing grassroots’ technological innovations and traditional knowledge,
values and institutions: articulating social and ethical capital. Futures 35:975–987. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0016-3287(03)00053-3
Halder PK (2016) Potential and economic feasibility of solar home systems implementation in
Bangladesh. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 65:68–76
Hellsmark H, Frishammar J, Söderholm P, Ylinenpää H (2016) The role of pilot and demonstration
plants in technology development and innovation policy. Res Policy 45(9):1743–1761
Hendry C, Harborne P, Brown J (2010) So what do innovating companies really get from publicly
funded demonstration projects and trials? innovation lessons from solar photovoltaics and wind.
Energy Policy 38(8):4507–4519
Huenteler J, Schmidt CNTS (2014) The effect of local and global learning on the cost of renewable
energy in developing countries. J Clean Prod
Jha S, Patnaik S, Jain A (2019) Financing solar-powered livelihoods in India: evidence from micro
enterprises. Council on Energy, Environment and Water, New Delhi
Karlström M, Sandén BA (2004) Selecting and assessing demonstration projects for technology
assessment: the case of fuel cells and hydrogen systems in Sweden. Innov: Manag, Policy Pract
6:286–293
Kochtcheeva LV (2016) Renewable energy: global challenges. E-Int Relat ISSN 2053-8626
292
M. Govindan et al.
MacLeod JM, Rosei F (2015) Supporting the development and deployment of sustainable energy
technologies through targeted scientiﬁc training. In: Hostettler S, Gadgil A, Hazboun E (eds)
Sustainable access to energy in the global south: essential technologies and implementation
approaches. Springer Interntaional Publishing, London, pp 231–233
Magill K, Rogers E (1981) Federally sponsored demonstrations of technological innovations. Knowl
Creat Diffus, Util 3:23–42
Mohiuddin S (2006) Microﬁnance: expanding the role of microﬁnance in promoting renewable
energy access in developing countries. Georg Public Policy Rev 11:119
National Skill Development Council (2021) District skills development plan. District Prgramme
Management Unit, Sultanpur
Nguyen QA et al (1996) NREL/DOE ethanol pilot-plant: current status and capabilities. Biosource
Technol 58:189–196
Parks M, Bansal S, Zilberman D (2016) Fit-risk in development projects: role of demonstration
in technology adoption. Environ Dev Econ 21(6):742–766. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1355770X
16000188
Pin A, Pennink B, Balsters H, Sianipar C (2021) Sianipar technological appropriateness of biomass
production in rural settings: addressing water hyacinths (E. crassipes) problem in Lake Tondano.
Indones Technol Soc 101658(66)
Press Information Bureau (2023) Role of MSME Sector in the Country. Role of MSME Sector in
the Country
Rebane KL, Barham BL (2011) Knowledge and adoption of solar home systems in rural Nicaragua.
Energy Policy 39:3064–3075. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2011.02.005
Sartori G (1991) Comparing and miscomparing. J Theor Polit 243–257
Talaei A, Ahadi MS, Maghsoudy S (2014) Maghsoudy Climate friendly technology transfer in the
energy sector: a case study of Iran. Energy Policy 64:349–363. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.
2013.09.050
Urpelainen J, Yoon S (2015) Solar home systems for rural India: survey evidence on awareness and
willingness to pay from Uttar Pradesh. Energy Sustain Dev 24:70–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.esd.2014.10.005
Wang M et al (2023) The spatial spillover effect of clean energy development on economic develop-
ment: a case of theoretical and empirical analyses from China. Int J Environ Res Public Health
20(4):3144
Priority Issues for Future Cities:
Opportunities and Challenges
for Sustainable Development Research
Jerry Kolo
Abstract Since the 1992 Rio Summit when the world endorsed Brundtlant Commis-
sion’s sustainable development as the framework for development policy and agenda
around the world, development scholars, practitioners and policy makers have
focused more on the economy pillar and, with the recent threats of climate change,
the natural environment pillar of the Brundtland sustainability framework. Receiving
inadequate attention is the social equity pillar. Meanwhile, cities are facing serious
political, economic, environmental and social challenges resulting from pervasive
inequity and injustices. The complex myriad of issues in the face of limited political,
ﬁnancial, environmental and other resources would require cities to prioritize their
challenges. What would the priority issues be for future cities? What opportunities
and challenges would the priorities pose for sustainability research? These ques-
tions were answered through an online global snowball survey, and the results were
analyzed qualitatively using the nominal group technique with a research group of
ﬁfteen millennials. The chapter concluded by delineating the nexus and implications
of future city challenges and sustainability research.
Keywords Future cities · Sustainability pillars · Sustainability pentagon ·
Sustainability research
1
Introduction
At the ﬁrst earth summit on environment and development that was held in Rio
de Janeiro in Brazil in 1992, the world leaders in attendance acknowledged the
precarious relationship between the natural environment and economic growth and
development. As a result, the leaders endorsed sustainable development (SD) as the
conceptual framework to guide and drive development policy, programs and agenda
around the world. The concept of SD was articulated and deﬁned in the report by the
J. Kolo (B)
College of Architecture, Art & Design, Master of Urban Planning Program, American University
of Sharjah, Sharjah, United Arab Emirates
e-mail: jkolo@aus.edu
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_18
293
294
J. Kolo
1983 UN-established Brundtland Commission as “development that meets the needs
of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their
own needs” (WCED 1987, p. 43) This deﬁnition is widely used in policy, governance,
corporate, and advocacy circles, the conceptual debate and criticisms by SD scholars
notwithstanding.
The Brundtland Report anchored SD on three pillars, namely, economy, envi-
ronment and equity (3-Es). Variants of this Brundtland 3-E framework have been
proposed by scholars, in efforts to facilitate both understanding and implementation,
feasibility or application of SD. Three examples of such variants are the sustain-
ability triple-bottom-line (TBL) by Elkington (1994; 2004); the sustainability prism
by Godschalk (2004) and Berke et al. (2006); and, the sustainability pentagon by
Kolo (2015). Generally, the point of departure of each of these variants is Brundt-
land’s framework. More speciﬁcally, Elkington (ibid) substituted Brundtland’s 3-E
pillars with his TBL pillars, which are people, proﬁt and planet. He argued from a
business standpoint that businesses could pursue their primary proﬁt-making motive
while simultaneously caring about the people or communities they serve, and the
environment that enables the production of goods and services. Godschalk (2004)
and Berke et al. (2006) added a fourth pillar, which is livability, to the Brundtland’s
3-E framework, resulting in the label ‘prism.’ As urban planners, they examined the
axes that connect livability to the economy, environment and equity pillars, noting
that ‘intractable’ value conﬂicts arise or occur on each axis. They stated emphatically
that “although the sustainability concept has considerable promise and local plan-
ning programs have forged ahead in experimenting and applying their own variants,
management of conﬂicts arising from the separate thrusts of environment, economy,
and equity has been less than tractable” (Berke et al. 2006, p. 37).
In proposing a 5-E sustainability framework dubbed sustainability pentagon, Kolo
(2015) added two Es to Brundtland’s 3-Es, namely engagement and enlightenment.
The framework resulted from his extensive ﬁeld work in community outreach and
empowerment in low- and moderate-income communities in South Florida, USA.
One of the key insights and lessons from the ﬁeld work is that the three Brundt-
land pillars are feasible only if communities are directly, actively and meaningfully
engaged in planning, implementing, evaluating and scaling up on sustainability initia-
tives. A dividend of such engagement is enlightenment, where the transmission of
knowledge, skills, information and insights among community stakeholders results in
clear and substantive understanding of all sustainability policies, programs, projects
and issues. The ﬁve pillars of the SD pentagon were used as the analytical framework
for the results of the survey conducted for this chapter.
Since Rio 1992 and the plethora of conventions signed by the world leaders
to implement SD locally, nationally and globally, an array of policies, programs,
projects, agreements and collaborations has emerged and continues to emerge on SD
implementation. Examples of notable initiatives include Kyoto Protocol, which is a
1990 agreement made under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC), urging the industrialized countries to reduce their collective
emissions of greenhouse gases by 5.2% compared to the year 1990. This is the
origin of all that is attributed to the Conference of Parties (COP) to date in terms of
Priority Issues for Future Cities: Opportunities and Challenges …
295
climate change mitigation and adaptation initiatives. Another example is the United
Nations (UN) Agenda 21, which is a comprehensive plan of global, national, and
local environmental protection actions, dubbed ‘Local Agenda 21’ or ‘LA21’ plans,
by agencies of the UN system, governments, and grassroots communities. Another
example is the UN Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), which resulted from
a declaration by world leaders at the UN Millennium Summit in 2000. The leaders
adopted eight goals to be achieved by 2015. The goals covered the issues of poverty,
hunger, education, equality, health, the environment and global partnership for devel-
opment. Building on and superseding the MDGs is another example, which consists
of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), designed to be achieved by year
2030. Besides these global examples, there are various other sub-global examples
around the world, aimed at implementing the spirit and intent of SD. There is, for
example, the eco-municipality program, formulated by Swedish oncologist Karl-
Henrik Robert in a model he called The Natural Step (TNS) (James and Lahti 2004).
Various urban design models and environmental audit systems are also currently
used, most of them voluntarily by cities, to promote or achieve sustainability. These
range from design models, such as 15-minute cities, walkable cities, slow cities, smart
cities, inclusive cities, etc., to environmental impact audit systems, also known as
green building rating systems (Li et al. 2017), such as Building Research Establish-
ment Environmental Assessment Methodology (BREEAM), which originated in the
UK in 1990; Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) in the USA in
1998; Haute Qualité Environmentale (HQE) in France in 1996; Global Sustainability
Assessment System (GSAS) in Qatar in 2009; Green Star in Australia in 2002 and
used in New Zealand and South Africa; Comprehensive Assessment System for Built
Environment Efﬁciency (CASBEE) in Japan in 2004; DGNB in Germany in 2008;
Estidama (Pearl) in the United Arab Emirates in 2010; Green Pyramid in Egypt in
2009; Green Globes in Canada in 2000; Green Mark in Singapore in 2009; BEAM
Plus in Hong Kong in 1996; etc.
Efforts and initiatives around the world to facilitate the implementation of SD have
received mixed reviews, but mostly on the negative side, with some analysts even
advocating new models or a paradigm shift (Clark and Kavanagh 2019). However,
evidence is irrefutable that SD implementation continues to be hampered by various
political, economic, psychosocial and environmental challenges. While most of the
challenges are attributable to human decisions, some are caused by force majeure,
which are forces beyond human control but directly impactful on humans. In spite of
the mixed reviews of SD implementation and the incremental, controversial and even
contradictory overlay of initiatives, the UN is currently strategizing, negotiating and
charting the next phase of SD programming, which will be 2030–2045. The next SD
programming phase provided the context for the aim of this chapter, and the questions
addressed about priority issues for future cities and the SD research implications of
the priorities.
296
J. Kolo
2
SD Implementation Challenges
In spite of the mixed reviews of the effectiveness of SD implementation around
the world to date, this chapter noted that a viewpoint, observation or verdict that
reverberates in most circles of assessment is that progress in implementing and
achieving SD worldwide lags distantly behind the most modest of expectations, and
that the world is faced with a herculean task in quickening or shrinking this pace.
Various reasons have been adduced in the academic and professional literature
for the mixed review of SD implementation and achievement to date. For example,
in a review of the literature on SD implementation challenges, Kolo et al. (2022)
clustered various reasons, with annotations, under ﬁve categories, viz, political or
governance; economic; psychosocial; natural environment; and built environment.
Under each of these clusters, speciﬁc reasons have been identiﬁed or adduced by
scholars and experts. For example, alluding broadly to the relationship between the
environment and development, Marsh and Grossa (1996) identiﬁed four dilemmas
that the world faces in harmonizing this relationship. The dilemmas are population
explosion, consumerism, technological exploit, and discord about the meaning of
SD.
3
SD and Future Cities: Research Questions, Aim
and Methods
Reﬂecting on, and examining the challenges of SD implementation in cities today,
three questions were posed and addressed in this chapter. One, what growth, devel-
opment and quality of life issues would the respondents to the survey conducted in
the research for this chapter deem to be priorities for future cities to address? Two,
under which of the ﬁve SD pentagon pillars will the research think tank that analyzed
the survey results cluster the priorities for future cities? Three, what would be impli-
cations of the priorities for future cities for SD research? The focus on future cities
is proactive or forward-thinking, given the rapid rate of urbanization worldwide, and
the complex issues that will confound cities. The challenges and characteristics of
future cities are subjects of robust research and policy debates and reﬂection, in the
quest to facilitate proactive measures by cities to govern and manage the affairs of
citizens responsibly and cost-effectively. In the same ‘futuristic’ sense, millennials
were directly engaged in this research, for their chronological ages and generational
perspectives, in assigning priority importance to the issues that future cities will face.
Ultimately, the key aim of this chapter is to delineate how SD research can facilitate
the governance of future cities sustainably.
Methodologically, three techniques were used for the research for this chapter.
One, in order to capture the priorities for future cities, an online questionnaire survey
was conducted over a two-week period, using the snowball survey technique. 111
valid responses were received from 16 countries worldwide. Two, in order to assign
Priority Issues for Future Cities: Opportunities and Challenges …
297
priorities to the results of the survey, ﬁfteen millennials in a graduate urban planning
program were involved in an intensive three-hour think tank that used the Nominal
Group Technique—NGT (Van De Ven and Delbecq 1974) to assign priorities to
the issues identiﬁed through the survey, and to cluster the issues according to the
ﬁve pillars of the SD pentagon. Three, the desktop method was used to review the
literature on SD pillars, and for insights into how scholarly research can facilitate
SD implementation.
The ratings and clustering of issues in the NGT process were done through guide-
lines negotiated and agreed upon by the participants in the process. For both rating
and clustering, a participant proposed a high, medium or low rating for an issue,
and a cluster for the same issue. A brief discussion of the proposal was followed
by a simple majority vote by all the participants to approve or reject the rating or
cluster. An issue was assigned to a pillar if addressing it would enhance the pillar
highly, moderately or lowly, or if ignoring it would harm, undermine the pillar highly,
moderately or lowly. Most important for policy and planning purposes is the high
rating, which suggests or implies issues that need continued or accelerated attention,
resources and intervention by government and other pertinent stakeholders. Real-
izing that an issue could apply to more than one cluster, the participants agreed to
select the top three of the ﬁve clusters that an issue could apply or be assigned to.
4
Survey Results, Analysis and Discussion
The results of the online survey are shown in Table 1. The results show that a total
of 25 priority issues for future cities were identiﬁed by the survey respondents. The
Table shows the ratings of the issues by participants in the NGT process as high,
medium or low in priority. The issues were ranked, based on the percentage weight
of high priority assigned to each issue. The Table also shows that the highest ranked
issue is environmental or climate change management, while the lowest is advanced
air mobility. Each issue was assigned to any top three of the ﬁve SD pillars of the
pentagon framework that the NGT participants deemed most pertinent for policy
and planning focus and action in future cities. The frequencies of the clusters were
compiled and, as Table 1 shows, the equity pillar, with a frequency of 22, would
require priority attention in future cities for the issues assigned to the pillar. Following
the equity pillar are, successively, the economy pillar with a frequency of 18; the
engagement pillar with a frequency of 13; the environment pillar with a frequency of
12; and, the enlightenment pillar with a frequency of 10. It is important to state that
the NGT participants acknowledged the complementarity and mutual reinforcement
of the pillars and the cluster of issues under each pillar. This points fundamentally
and crucially to the need to integrate policies, programs and plans across scales,
speciﬁcally vertically between and among levels of governments and the relevant
stakeholders, and horizontally between and among agencies of governments and all
the relevant stakeholders.
298
J. Kolo
Table 1 Priorities for future cities, by SD pillars
(E1-Equity = 22 E2-Economy = 18
E3-Engagement =
13 E4-Environment = 12
E5-Enlightenment = 10)
Priorities for future cities
Priority ratings (Total = 111)
Pertinent SD pillars
High
Medium
Low
1. Environmental/climate change
management
86
11
3
E4
E1
E2
2. Resilient and green infrastructure
systems (energy, water, mobility,
etc.)
84
13
3
E4
E2
E1
3. Public safety (preventing
insecurity and crime)
83
13
4
E1
E2
E4
4. Education and capacity-building
82
14
4
E5
E2
E1
5. Healthy cities, healthy people
(preventive health and quality
healthcare)
82
14
4
E1
E2
E5
6. More accountable and
transparent governance (reduced
corruption)
78
17
5
E3
E5
E1
7. Social services and welfare for
children, elderly and handicaps
76
20
4
E1
E3
E5
8. Affordable, mixed-income
housing
73
21
6
E1
E4
E2
9. Effective land use planning/
zoning (anti urban sprawl)
70
26
4
E4
E1
E2
10. Responsible public budgeting,
ﬁnance and spending (less debt)
69
28
3
E2
E5
E1
11. Urban economic development
(jobs, businesses, industries,
etc.)
68
26
6
E2
E3
E1
12. Urban agriculture and food
sustainability
68
22
10
E2
E3
E1
13. Mass transit and public
transport before more roadways
66
27
7
E4
E1
E2
14. Community outreach and
empowerment for people
66
26
8
E3
E5
E1
15. Public–private partnerships for
projects and programs
61
29
10
E2
E3
E1
16. Inclusive, socially just cities
(gender, race, nationality,
religion, etc.)
60
31
9
E1
E3
E5
(continued)
Priority Issues for Future Cities: Opportunities and Challenges …
299
Table 1 (continued)
(E1-Equity = 22 E2-Economy = 18
E3-Engagement =
13 E4-Environment = 12
E5-Enlightenment = 10)
Priorities for future cities
Priority ratings (Total = 111)
Pertinent SD pillars
High
Medium
Low
17. Historic, heritage and cultural
preservation
60
31
9
E4
E1
E2
18. Youth and women in leadership
positions
57
32
11
E3
E1
E5
19. Fast trains for long distance
travel, not airplanes and more
airports
57
30
13
E4
E2
E1
20. Participation of all people in
governance
53
39
8
E3
E1
E5
21. Use technology and artiﬁcial
intelligence to provide and
manage city services
51
44
5
E2
E4
E3
22. Tourism and hospitality
41
53
6
E2
E3
E1
23. Reduced power and inﬂuence of
corporations/big business over
governments
40
49
11
E1
E3
E4
24. For proﬁt mega or super
buildings, malls and
architecture
26
48
26
E2
E4
E3
25. Advanced Air Mobility (ﬂying
vehicles, air taxis, wingsuits,
volocopters, etc.) for urban
transport
22
39
39
E2
E5
E4
Reﬂecting on the results of the survey presented in Table 1 and the outcomes of the
NGT exercise, two speciﬁc observations stand out for discussion in this chapter. One
is that the 25 issues identiﬁed by the survey respondents are examples of the issues
that cities are currently wrestling with. More importantly, they are issues that cities
will contend with on a more intensiﬁed scale in the future, due largely to political
and ideological conﬂicts; budgetary constraints; environmental challenges; social
exigencies and conﬂicts; rising public expectations and agitation; and, various other
factors.
The issues identiﬁed by the survey respondents are not inconsistent with the issues
and challenges that are widely discussed in the literature for current and future cities,
in their quest to be more resilient, prosperous, livable and sustainable (Borja and
Castells 1997; Planete Energies 2024; Futureagenda 2017). Worth highlighting here
are the ﬁndings of an extensive empirical study of the challenges of future cities
by Futureagenda (2017), the world’s leading open foresight program. In 2015 and
300
J. Kolo
2016, several ‘future of cities’ workshops were run in key locations worldwide,
complemented by over 100 other events that provided multiple insights on the future
of cities. The program concluded that:
Although some points were speciﬁc to individual locations, a number of issues were uniﬁed
across all our discussions. We found three common challenges, three shared future ambitions
and three emerging concerns. The three common challenges are managing migration, coun-
tering inequality and scaling sustainability. The three shared ambitions are healthy cities,
accessible cities and intelligent cities. The three emerging concerns are safe cities, resilient
cities and collaborative competition.
It is noteworthy that the ﬁndings of the program across the three clusters of issues
bear close semblance to the ﬁndings of the survey conducted for this chapter.
A second observation on the outcomes of the survey and NGT exercise for this
chapter is that the outcomes of the exercise are very consistent with what seems
to be a universal concern among SD scholars and professionals, that the equity
pillar of SD is not accorded equal or due attention, compared to the economy and
environment pillars (Stronati 2024; Sivaraman 2020; Monnapula-Mapesela 2014;
Murphy 2014; Cuthill 2009; Berke et al. 2006; Stymne and Jackson 2000;). This
is in spite of the widespread, mounting and disturbing evidence that the cluster
of issues under the pillar are destabilizing age-old traditions, systems and norms in
societies worldwide (Oxfam 2024; UNDESA 2023; Sivaraman 2020). From extreme
political and ideological divisions at the governance level to social and cultural intol-
erance at the grassroots level, the virtues of the world’s common humanity are being
eroded and decimated ﬂagrantly by inequitable, unjust, exclusionary, discriminatory,
prejudiced and hateful policies, programs and behaviors by formal institutions and
ill-intentioned groups and individuals. The spread, severity and impacts of social
inequity and injustice across the world are well documented in both the empirical
and scholarly literature.
The results of the survey and the NGT process presented earlier, and the two key
observations discussed brieﬂy above, have signiﬁcant implications for public policy,
entrepreneurship, advocacy, research and grassroots initiatives across the world. In
line with the aim of this chapter, the focus in the chapter is on the implications of
the priority issues for future cities for academic SD research. The implications are
presented in the following section.
5
Priorities Issues for Future Cites and the Role of SD
Research
In conjecturing or delineating the implications of the priorities for future cities for
scholarly SD research, this chapter projects research from the broadest lenses in
terms of the various intentions, activities, phases, outcomes, and applications that
research design may imply or entail. In essence, the chapter deems research to go
beyond the traditional or normative notion of data collection and analysis, to various
Priority Issues for Future Cities: Opportunities and Challenges …
301
other dimensions that make research a valuable component of the broad and intricate
process of understanding and improving phenomena, that is, linking knowledge to
action,orproblem-solving.Inthissense,Table2identiﬁeswhatthischapterconsiders
to be some opportunities and challenges of the priorities for future cities for SD
research. The Table uses the broad view of research implied above to compile ten
tasks or roles of SD research in enabling future cities to address their priority issues.
The roles reﬂect the inextricable relationship between and among the SD pillars,
hence, the essence and overall goal of the roles are to facilitate each and all the pillars
of SD. The roles are suggestive and by no means exhaustive. Some opportunities and
challenges associated with each role or task are listed.
6
Conclusion
This chapter presented 25 issues that 111 anonymous respondents to an empirical
survey identiﬁed for future cities to prioritize, in order to serve their citizens effec-
tively and be livable and sustainable. The issues were rated and clustered by a think
tank of millennial scholars, based on the ﬁve pillars of the SD pentagon framework,
viz, environment, economy, equity, engagement and enlightenment. The pillars were
ranked according to the cluster of issues assigned to them by the think tank. The
ranking showed the equity pillar as the cluster with the highest frequency of issues
that future cities should prioritize, in order for them to be livable and sustainable. The
equity pillar was followed successively by the economy, engagement, environment
and enlightenment pillars. This ranking in no way denies the complementary and
inseparable relationship between and among the ﬁve SD pillars. Therefore, policies,
plans, programs and projects ought to be integrated both vertically and horizontally,
in order to implement SD cost-effectively.
The chapter emphasized that, in the face of decision-making or choices about
thriving and surviving, historical evidence and experiences show that societies have
always prioritized the economy and politics over the environment and equity. Pitched
against each other for prioritization, the order of priority is always the economy,
followed by politics then the environment and, lastly, social equity. Pertinently,
scholars such as Thin (2002) described equity as the elusive pillar of SD. In this
sense, prioritizing rather than integrating all the SD pillars into policies, programs
and projects is more detrimental than beneﬁcial for society or the public. The prior-
itization implied in this chapter is to alert governments and societal stakeholders to
scale up on equity, so it aligns with the economy and environment pillars, thereby
enabling future cities to avoid the destabilizing impacts of inequity and injustice.
Finally, the chapter took a broad and multi-dimensional view of research and, in
line with the aim of the chapter, delineated some implications of the priorities for
future cities for SD research. The view of research represents the multiple roles that
research can and should play in enabling future cities to address their priority issues
effectively. Some of the opportunities and challenges associated with each research
role were identiﬁed as actionable guides for SD researchers, scholars and other
302
J. Kolo
Table 2 Opportunities and challenges of SD research for future cities
SD research roles
Opportunities
Challenges
1. Data collection, analysis,
dissemination
• Collect, analyze,
disseminate, store usable
data
• Frame concepts and design
practical models
• Review, update, apply data
• Chart new, cutting-edge
research pathways
• Limits and terms of research
funding
• Data, Intellectual Property
proprietorship
• Data storage, dissemination
costs
2. Contextual model and
paradigm design
• Formulate models and
design frameworks that are
locally contextual
• Propose implementation
dynamics, protocols for
models
• Limits and terms of research
funding
• Accreditation and patent
constraints
• Academic elitism
3. Knowledge management
for capacity building
• Collect, provide usable
knowledge for all
stakeholders
• Calibrate knowledge with
community priorities
• Prescribe, provide capacity
training
• Limits and terms of research
funding
• Accreditation and patent
constraints
• Academic elitism
4. Community outreach and
empowerment
• Engage community
stakeholders in research,
program collaborations
• Conduct informal,
continuing, non-credit
education and training
• Limits and terms of research
funding
• Track record and experience
issues
• Academic elitism
• Credibility issues with
community
5. Public policy input and
governance
• Conduct research with clear
policy and problem-solving
applications
• Collaborate with policy
makers for input on research
agenda, funding,
application, dissemination
• Provide services to bridge
stakeholder gaps
(collaboration and
partnerships)
• Customize leadership and
governance education and
training for policy makers
and stakeholders
• Limits and terms of research
funding
• Track record and experience
issues
• Academic elitism
• Credibility issues with
community
• Scheduling and time
constraints
(continued)
Priority Issues for Future Cities: Opportunities and Challenges …
303
Table 2 (continued)
SD research roles
Opportunities
Challenges
6. Competitiveness across
entrepreneurial scales
• Conduct research for
feasible enterprises based on
local capacity and resources
• Provide technical assistance
to micro and small ventures
to build capacity
• Facilitate collaborations and
partnerships between
corporations and micro and
small businesses (corporate
social responsibility-CSR,
environmental, social,
governance-ESG, etc.)
• Facilitate
government-business
partnerships
• Benchmark local and
international
competitiveness capacities
• Limits and terms of research
funding
• Track record and experience
issues
• Academic elitism
• Credibility issues with
corporations
• Scheduling and time
constraints
7. Advocacy and civic
engagement
• Provide research data for
advocacy and civic causes
• Conduct capacity-building
training for civic and
grassroots entities
• Provide technical assistance
for civic and grassroots
entities
• Facilitate multi-party
partnerships for and with
civic and grassroots entities
• Limits and terms of research
funding
• Track record and experience
issues
• Academic elitism
• Credibility issues with civic
groups
• Scheduling and time
constraints
8. Innovations and inventions
• Conduct experimental,
empirical research to
innovate, invent tools,
protocols for
problem-solving
• Collaborate with industry
and interested parties on
joint research and
innovations
• Research, benchmark,
promote appropriate
cutting-edge innovations,
technology, protocols
• Limits and terms of research
funding
• Track record and experience
issues
• Technology, facility
constraints
• Credibility issues with
corporations
• Scheduling and time
constraints
• Data, Intellectual Property
proprietorship and patent
(continued)
304
J. Kolo
Table 2 (continued)
SD research roles
Opportunities
Challenges
9. Forecasting, simulation and
trend-setting
• Simulate, forecast, model
future scenarios
• Engage stakeholders to
forecast, plan for future
• Limits and terms of research
funding
• Track record and experience
issues
• Data, Intellectual Property
proprietorship and patent
• Technology, facility
constraints
10. Stakeholder collaboration
• Facilitate, organize,
coordinate multi-party
stakeholder partnerships
• Conduct training and
outreach on collaboration
strategies
• Produce data, manuals for
stakeholder collaboration
• Limits and terms of research
funding
• Track record and experience
issues
• Academic elitism
• Credibility issues with
stakeholders
• Scheduling and time
constraints
Source Compiled by author, 2024
experts. The unique and important role of research in addressing inequity and injus-
tice was echoed loudly by UNDESA (2023). Similarly, Boone and Modarres (2006)
prescribed pathways to SD, which, difﬁcult as they are, and similar to those suggested
in this chapter, portend vast opportunities for SD researchers. The opportunities will
enable SD researchers to produce usable, pertinent and actionable knowledge and
information for policy and planning purposes by all societal stakeholders.
References
Berke PR, Godschalk DR, Kaiser EJ, with Rodriguez DA (2006) Urban land use planning, 5th edn.
University of Illinois Press, Champaign, IL
Boone CG, Modarres A (2006) City and the Environment. Temple University Press, Philadelphia,
PA
Borja J, Castells M (1997) Local and global: management of cities in the information age. Earthscan,
London, UK
Clark CMA, Kavanagh C (2019) Measuring progress: the sustainable progress index 2019. Social
Justice Ireland, Dublin, Ireland
Cuthill M (2009) Strengthening the social in sustainable development: developing a conceptual
framework for social sustainability in a rapid urban growth region in Australia. Sustain Dev
18(6):362–373
Elkington J (2004) Enter the triple bottom line. http://www.johnelkington.com/archive/TBL-elking
ton-chapter.pdf. Accessed 17 Sept 2022
Elkington J (1994) Towards the sustainable corporation: win-win business strategies for sustainable
development. Calif Manage Rev 36:90–100. https://doi.org/10.2307/41165746
Priority Issues for Future Cities: Opportunities and Challenges …
305
Futureagenda (2017) The future of cities: summary of insights from multiple expert discussions
around the world. https://www.futureofcities.city/pdf/full/Future%20of%20Cities%20Report%
202017.pdf. Accessed 2 Mar 2024
Goldschalk D (2004) Land use planning challenges: coping with conﬂicts in sustainable develop-
ment and livability community visions. J Am Plann Assoc 70(1):5–13
James S, Lahti T (2004) The natural step for communities: how cities and towns can change to
sustainable practices. New Society Publishers, Gabriola Island, BC
Kolo J, Schrouder S, Almashhour R (2022) Reﬂections on sustainable development planning and
implementation: proposals for a stakeholder-oriented framework. In: Proceedings of the 28th
annual conference of the international sustainable development research society. Stockholm,
Sweden, June 15–17, pp 1398–1412. ISBN: 978-91-89504-17-2
Kolo J (2015) A critical analysis of tourism as a strategy for sustainable development and poverty
alleviation in sub- Saharan Africa. In: Nwankwo S, Ibeh K (eds) The Routledge companion to
business in Africa. Routledge, London, pp 516–532
Li Y, Chen X, Wand X, Xu Y, Chen PH (2017) A review of studies on green building assessment
methods by comparative analysis. Energy Build 146:152–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.
2017.04.076
Marsh WM, Grossa JM Jr (1996) Environment geography: science, land use, and earth systems.
Wiley, New York
Monnapula-Mapesela M (2014) Sustainable development as social equity: policy contradictions
and their impact on higher education. https://journals.co.za/doi/pdf/. https://doi.org/10.10520/
EJC159147. Accessed 22 Mar 2024
Murphy K (2012) The social pillar of sustainable development: a literature review and framework
forpolicyanalysis.SustainSciPractPolicy8(1):15–29.https://doi.org/10.1080/15487733.2012.
11908081
Oxfam (2024) Inequality, made in America: how corporate America is fueling our inequality
crisis. https://webassets.oxfamamerica.org/media/documents/Media_Brief_Inequality_Made_
In_America.pdf. Accessed 15 Mar 2024
Planète Energies (2024) Challenges for the cities of the future. https://www.planete-energies.com/
en/media/article/challenges-cities-future. Accessed 2 Mar 2024
Sivaraman A (2020) Five things you need to know about social sustainability and inclusion. https://
www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2020/09/02/ﬁve-things-about-social-sustainability-and-
inclusion. Accessed 5 Mar 2024
Stronati D (2024) The neglected pillar. https://www.mottmac.com/views/the-neglected-pillar.
Accessed 25 Mar 2024
Stymne S, Jackson T (2000) Intra-generational equity and sustainable welfare: a time series analysis
for the UK and Sweden. Ecol Econ 33(2):219–236. www.elsevier.com/locate/www.ecolecon
Thin N (2002) Social progress and sustainable development. ITDG Publishing, London
UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs- UNDESA (2023) The sustainable development
goals report 2023: special edition. https://unstats.un.org/sdgs/report/2023/The-Sustainable-Dev
elopment-Goals-Report-2023.pdf. Accessed 10 Mar 2024
Van De Ven AH, Delbecq AL (1974) The effectiveness of nominal, Delphi, and interacting group
decision making processes. Acad Manag J 17:605–621. https://doi.org/10.5465/255641
World Commission on Environment and Development- WCED (1987) Our common future. Oxford
University Press, New York
An Agenda for Sustainable Development:
The Role of Strategic Impact Assessment
in Promoting Namibia’s Transition
to a Green Economy
Philip Mensah, Eric Yankson, and Derrick Frimpong Buabeng
Abstract Strategic impact assessment (SIA), also known as strategic environmental
assessment (SEA), is a systematic approach to decision-making that considers
the dimensions of a green economy transformation for sustainable development.
Although, Namibia has made signiﬁcant strides to attain the United Nations Sustain-
able Development Goals (UN-SDGs) 5, 13 and 15 i.e. gender equality, climate action
and life on land respectively, the country seems to be struggling to meet the other
aspects of the SDG targets. The chapter reviews relevant documents and analyzes
results to identify the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats of the current
impact assessment methodologies, in the context of the UN-SDGs. Followed by a
qualitative research approach, utilizing a case study design and purposive sampling
technique. The target population comprised personnel from the National Environ-
mental Affairs, Development Planning Commission, and Lands and Resettlement
Authority in Namibia, key exploration of stakeholders in SEA administration. Data
collection involved conducting in-depth interviews with six ofﬁcers, two from each
institution, using semi-structured interview guide. The ﬁndings show that Namibia
undertook a voluntary SEA between 2008 and 2013, although it is not yet a legal
mandate. It is evident that the drivers of SEA legislation have the potential to a
green economy transformation for sustainable development with 64.3% SDG index
score and 89.7% spillover score in Namibia. The level of this SDG achievement
indicates the country’s commitment to SIA in land use and spatial planning poli-
cies, plans and programs for sustainable development. The research also identiﬁes
potential improvements and recommendations for a more robust impact assessment
P. Mensah (B) · D. F. Buabeng
Department of Land and Spatial Sciences, Namibia University of Science and Technology,
Windhoek, Namibia
e-mail: pmensah.st.nust.na@gmail.com; pm319834@gmail.com
D. F. Buabeng
e-mail: derrickfrimpongbuabeng@gmail.com
E. Yankson
Department of Architecture, Planning and Construction, Namibia University of Science and
Technology, Windhoek, Namibia
e-mail: eyankson@nust.na; ericyankson22@gmail.com
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_19
307
308
P. Mensah et al.
framework in guiding sustainable development. Enhanced stakeholder engagement,
integrated social and economic aspects more effectively, strengthened the capacity
of governments and stakeholders, and encouraged the use of SIA as a tool for devel-
opment policies, plans and programs (PPPs). The study concludes that SIA plays
a crucial role in guiding green economy transformation for sustainable develop-
ment and that improvements can be made to enhance its effectiveness in promoting
sustainable development.
Keywords Agenda · Green economy · Sustainable development · Land use and
spatial planning · Strategic impact assessment · Strategic environmental
assessment · Policies · Plans and programs · Namibia
1
Introduction: “An Agenda for Sustainable Development”
In the twenty-ﬁrst century, sustainable development has emerged as a paramount
global concern that encompasses three pillars: economic growth, environmental
justice and social equity i.e. prosperity, planet and people respectively (UN-SDGs
2021). This multifaceted challenge has prompted nations worldwide to reevaluate
their development models and prioritize sustainable practices through research.
Namibia, a country located in the southwestern corner of Africa, is no exception
to this global imperative. The nation’s developmental ambitions are inextricably
linked to the urgent need for an economically viable, environmentally sustainable
andsociallyequitablefuture.Thischapterthuscontributestothediscourseonsustain-
able development research by focusing on the role of SIA as a crucial instrument for
fostering environmental consciousness and economic resilience. This is particularly
evident in Namibia, where the transition to a green economy stands as a paramount
objective for ensuring long-term sustainability and prosperity. According to Sachs
et al. (2023), the adoption and acceptance of the UN-SDGs of Agenda 2030 aimed to
achieve the slogan “leave no one behind” (LNOB) by accomplishing 17 goals aligned
with the three sustainable pillars (see Fig. 1). Nevertheless, inefﬁcient growth in a
single nation can undermine even the most well-intentioned initiatives for sustainable
development in other regions, ultimately leading to an unsustainable planet.
The SDGs, which are a universal call to action to end poverty, protect the planet
and ensure that all people enjoy peace and prosperity, are the goals that the United
Nations(UN)isworkingoninNamibia(UN2023b).AccordingtotheUnitedNations
Development Programme (UNDP), these goals are interconnected, and addressing
themrequireseffectivepartnerships,buildingontheexperienceandresourcingstrate-
gies of partnerships (UNDP 2023). Namibia has made signiﬁcant strides in reducing
poverty and improving access to education, and the country has also taken bold
steps including the adoption of renewable energy sources to address climate change
(Nangolo 2023). However, there are still challenges that impede progress, such as
high levels of inequality and limited access to decent housing (UN-SDGs 2021; Sachs
et al. 2023). The country faces unsustainable development challenges, and addressing
An Agenda for Sustainable Development: The Role of Strategic Impact …
309
Fig. 1 The 17 UN SDGs. Source Modiﬁed from UN SDG Knowledge Platform (2023)
these issues requires a comprehensive research approach that considers the inter-
connectedness of the three SDG pillars: people, prosperity, and planet (UN-SDGs
2021).
Sustainable development is universally relevant, but its level varies by location,
direction, and evolution (see Fig. 2). Thus, countries are positioned differently on the
sustainability continuum, with developed economies prioritizing goals like reducing
greenhouse emissions while developing economies focus on issues like food provi-
sion and poverty eradication (UN-SDGs 2021). The COVID-19 pandemic has under-
scored the dynamic nature of sustainable development, where economic recovery
may sometimes come at the expense of the environment (Jensen et al. 2021). Namibia
possesses a unique opportunity to build a sustainable future through research because
it is characterized by a delicate ecological balance and a unique blend of natural
beauty and extraordinary natural resources including pristine landscapes, diverse
wildlife, and renewable energy potential (UN-SDGs 2021). Its landscapes span from
the arid deserts of Namib to the lush green banks of the Okavango River, teeming
with diverse ﬂora and fauna that best represent the chosen case study in sub-Saharan
Africa.
However, like many other nations, Namibia faces critical challenges in terms of
economic development, environmental conservation and social inclusion. Thus, its
journey towards sustainable development is a testament to the dynamics or nuances
inherent in such a transformation (UN-SDGs 2021). In other words, Namibia’s
commitment to enhancing the livelihoods of its citizens, particularly in informal
settlements within urban areas, underscores the need for inclusive and equitable
310
P. Mensah et al.
Fig. 2 The universal, dynamic, location-dependent and evolutionary nature of sustainable devel-
opment. Source Modiﬁed from Ibeh and Walmsley (2021)
development strategies. Cities are central to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Devel-
opment, and making cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and
sustainable is a key aspect of SDG 11 (UN-SDGs 2021). Moreover, existing liter-
ature, while insightful, often lacks a comprehensive analysis of the nexus between
sustainable development and the green economy in many parts of the Global South,
leaving a signiﬁcant gap in our understanding of this pressing concern. In this chapter,
we delve into the multifaceted issue of sustainable development and its impacts on
the environment, exploring its ramiﬁcations for one of the most promising and rele-
vant paradigms of our time i.e. the role of SIA on a green economy transforma-
tion for sustainable development agenda. Although the green economy is a subset
of achieving the universal sustainable development goals known as the agenda
for sustainability (UN-SDGs 2021), it represents a crucial aspect of the broader
sustainability agenda.
Therefore, the primary objective of this chapter is to unpack the relationships
between sustainable development and the green economy, highlighting the role of
SEA in promoting sustainable economic development. To achieve this objective, the
research addresses the following questions: What is the current state of Namibia’s
green economy transition and its challenges? What tools and frameworks are used
for SIA in Namibia, and how effective are they? What international case studies
offer models for SIA in Namibia? What recommendations support SIA integra-
tion for sustainable development and the green economy transition in Namibia? By
exploring these questions, the chapter utilizes documentary review and exploration
of stakeholders via interviews, speciﬁcally six ofﬁcers from three pubic ministries
i.e. two staff members in each SEA administration. The ultimate goal is to deepen
An Agenda for Sustainable Development: The Role of Strategic Impact …
311
our understanding of the complex interplay between sustainable development and a
green economy transformation, guiding us toward a more sustainable and responsible
approach to land use and spatial planning PPPs.
In the pages that follow, we unpack the concepts, challenges, opportunities, and
potential solutions to safeguarding our green economy for generations to come i.e. the
global call for sustainable development using SEA as the methodological framework.
In the context of Namibia, data for the paper was collected through secondary litera-
ture, institutional instruments, reports, and in-depth interviews with selected govern-
ment agencies purposely to comprehend how SEA is inﬂuencing land use and spatial
planning PPPs. Its analysis also draws on the challenges and prospects for transition
which could serve as the roadmap for a green economy and sustainable development
elsewhere other than Namibia. Therefore, the sections that follow provide insights
into how strategic assessments can be leveraged to support sustainable land use and
spatial planning PPPs in Namibia.
2
Strategic Environmental Assessment Framework
The concept of SIA is a powerful tool for incorporating ecological issues into PPPs
that guide nations worldwide to a green economy (Fischer and González 2021).
This approach helps to ensure that development projects consider the environ-
mental consequences of their actions and promote sustainable practices (Broman and
Robèrt 2017). By integrating sustainable development into PPPs, countries can work
together to address environmental challenges and promote a more sustainable future
(UNDP 2023). SIA offers a structured method for decision-making that considers the
economic, environmental and social impacts of a project or policy. It involves iden-
tifying potential impacts, assessing their signiﬁcance and implementing measures to
mitigate or address these impacts (Fischer and González 2021). This process helps
to ensure that development projects are designed and executed in a manner that
promotes sustainable development, meets the needs of present generations without
compromising the ability of posterity to satisfy their own needs, and contributes to
the achievement of the UN SDGs (Sachs et al. 2023).
In the United States for instance, the national environmental policy act (NEPA)
was signed into law on January 1, 1970. This legislation mandates that before making
decisions, government agencies evaluate how their proposed actions may affect the
environment (George et al. 2020). The practice of evaluating the environmental
impact of projects has evolved since the introduction of the NEPA. The SEA emerged
as an extension of environmental impact assessment (EIA) which has been effective
in enhancing development project outcomes for over four decades now (Fischer and
González 2021). However, the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Devel-
opment (OECD), noted that the application of EIA in developing countries has faced
challenges, as it tends to restrict strategic options and increase risks of environmental
degradation and unsustainable outcomes (OECD 2012). Many developing countries
have historically overlooked ecological issues in their development paths. As a result,
312
P. Mensah et al.
SEA is now recognized and promoted as an assessment tool that is applied to strategic
decision-making (Islam and Zhang 2018).
The European Union (EU) directive for SEA stipulated that 80% of EU member
states should incorporate SEA into national legislation by 2004, and many inter-
national development organizations have subsequently encouraged the practice of
SEA worldwide. SEA is now conducted formally in more than 60 countries, and
legislation is being formulated in various developing countries to integrate SEA into
their policy-making and planning processes (OECD 2012). The need for sustainable
or green economies is emphasized, with SEA playing a role in evaluating envi-
ronmental aspects of socio-economic development towards ensuring sound environ-
mental management. It is noted that a green economy involves changes in production
and consumption patterns, emphasizing efﬁcient use of natural resources, preserva-
tion of environmental quality, and addressing social inequities (Cooper et al. 2020).
In response to the global push for green economy development, various initiatives
and institutional frameworks have emerged within international and national polit-
ical economies as the core principles of sustainable development i.e. SIA framework
(Wanner 2015).
In Africa, a green economy aims to achieve inclusive economic growth through
sustainable infrastructure investments, efﬁcient resource utilization, food security
enhancement, and resilience building against natural disasters through SIA legisla-
tion (African Development Bank 2018; Fischer and González 2021). African coun-
tries including Rwanda, Ethiopia, Kenya, and South Africa are actively pursuing
green growth strategies to address resource efﬁciency, ecological concerns and social
equity (Cooper et al. 2020). The United Nations Economic Commission for Africa
(UNECA), stated that Rwanda and Ethiopia in particular are committed to compre-
hensive green growth strategies, and they are among the fastest-growing economies
in Africa (UNECA 2023). Namibia is also committed to building a sustainable future
aligned with various initiatives and institutional frameworks. This paper thus delves
into understanding the pivotal role of SIA in promoting Namibia’s transition to a
green economy for sustainable development.
Globally, it is increasingly becoming evident that the philosophy for SIA legis-
lation on a green economy promotes long-term sustainable development. Namibia,
a nation endowed with a wealth of natural resources, holds enormous potential to
pioneer this transition within the African context. Thus, the nexus between the drivers
of SIA and the green economy has signiﬁcant implications for sustainable develop-
ment in the country (see Fig. 3). This paper presents a review of SIA legislation in
Namibia within the context of the UN SDGs. This serves as an assessment of the
obstacles in the way of accomplishing the SDGs and an examination of the poten-
tial beneﬁt that might result from using best practice SIA as a tool to help Namibia
achieve the SDGs (see Table 1).
Table 1 presents a summary of how Namibia is fairing concerning the 17 SDGs,
adopted from the 2023 UN SDGs report. According to Sachs et al. (2023), out
of the 17 goals, Namibia is only on course to maintain or meet Goals 5, 13 and
15 i.e. gender equality, climate action and life on land respectively. Despite some
improvements, Namibia is behind other countries in most other aspects of the SDGs.
An Agenda for Sustainable Development: The Role of Strategic Impact …
313
Drivers of Strategic 
Impact Assessment 
(SIA)
- Legal and regulatory 
requirements
- Social and economic 
considerations
- Environmental impact
- Infrastructure and 
utilities
- Stakeholder 
engagement and 
participation 
- Risk and resilience 
- Health and well-being
- Monitoring and 
evaluation 
Green Economy (GE)
- Renewable energy 
and energy efficiency 
- Circular economy and 
resource efficiency
- Clean transportation
- Green agriculture and 
food systems
- Ecosystem 
conservation and 
biodiversity protection
- Social equity and 
inclusive growth 
- Green infrastructure 
and urban planning
- Water management 
- Climate change 
mitigation and 
adaptation
Sustainable 
Development 
(Prospects)
- Universal social 
equity
- Universal economic 
growth 
- Universal 
environmental justices
- Leave no one behind 
(LNOB)
- Good governance and 
policy framework 
Fig. 3 Nexus and implications on sustainable development in Namibia. Source Authors’ construct
based on reports, literature and interviews
Contrary to the UN slogan of LNOB, Namibia seems to be struggling to meet various
SDG targets due to militating factors. These include data issues, conﬂict, governance
issues and weak institutions, ﬁnance, climate change, demographics and migration
(Ibeh and Walmsley 2021). According to the 2023 UN-SDGs report, Namibia ranks
109 out of 166 nations with a 64.3% SDG index score and 89.7% spillover score
which shows a good positive correlation between the development of SIA legislation
and green economy transformation for sustainable development (Sachs et al. 2023).
This implies that in order to integrate the SDGs with the SIA process, the three-
dimensional pillars—which deﬁne goals, design procedures, create deadlines, and
formulate and carry out choices to reach targets for the proactive creation of attainable
sustainable outcomes—are necessary. This means making certain that plans, policies,
and programs are in line with the SDGs’ ambition for transformative change. As a
result, activities to meet targets for socio-economic goals, environmental betterment
and restoration are in line with the targeted results of SIA.
314
P. Mensah et al.
Table 1 The 17 SDGs and levels of achievement in Namibia
S/N
Goal
Level of SDG
attainment
Empirical facts
1
No poverty
Decreasing but major
challenges remain
Poverty headcount ratio at $2.15/day
2
Zero hunger
Stagnating but
signiﬁcant challenges
remain
Prevalence of undernourishment
3
Good health and
well-being
Moderately improving
but challenges remain
Maternal mortality rate
4
Quality education
Moderately improving
but challenges remain
Participation rate in pre-primary
organized learning
5
Gender equality
On track to maintaining
SDG achievement
Demand for family planning satisﬁed by
modern methods
6
Clean water and
sanitation
Stagnating but
signiﬁcant challenges
remain
Population using at least basic drinking
water services
7
Affordable and
clean energy
Stagnating but
signiﬁcant challenges
remain
Population with access to electricity
8
Decent work and
economic growth
Stagnating but
signiﬁcant challenges
remain
Adjusted gross domestic product (GDP)
growth
9
Industry,
innovation and
infrastructure
Moderately improving
but challenges remain
Rural population with access to all-season
roads
10
Reduced
inequalities
Trend information
unavailable
Gini coefﬁcient
11
Sustainable cities
and communities
Decreasing but major
challenges remain
Proportion of urban population living in
slums
12
Responsible
consumption and
production
Moderately improving
but challenges remain
Municipal solid waste
13
Climate action
On track to maintaining
SDG achievement
CO2 emissions from fossil fuel
combustion and cement production
14
Life below water
Stagnating but
signiﬁcant challenges
remain
Mean area that is protected in marine sites
important to biodiversity
15
Life on land
On track to maintaining
SDG achievement
Mean area that is protected in terrestrial
sites important to biodiversity
16
Peace, justice and
institutions
Decreasing but major
challenges remain
Homicides
17
Partnerships for
the goals
Stagnating but
signiﬁcant challenges
remain
Government spending on health and
education
Source Authors’ construct based on the 2023 UN-SDGs report reviewed
An Agenda for Sustainable Development: The Role of Strategic Impact …
315
Existing institutional reports, legislative instruments and literature reviewed do
not explicitly address the presence of SIA or SEA frameworks within Namibia’s
existing PPPs for green economy transformation and sustainable development in
land use and spatial planning. This reality notwithstanding, it is evident that Namibia
is actively engaged in initiatives that are aligned with the principles of SEA. These
include the following: legal basis for SEA; terms of reference (ToR); choice of
consultants; screening and scoping; participation and public consultation; presenta-
tion of SEA; alternatives and cumulative effects; synergies and antagonisms; period,
timing and duration for conducting an SEA; the strategic perspective; the inﬂuence of
SEA; contentious issues; mitigation, monitoring and sustainability issues; and costs
(Hipondoka et al. 2016; Ibeh and Walmsley 2021). These principles of SEA underpin
the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats discussed in the next section, its
role in a green economy transformation and sustainable development agenda.
3
Trends in Green Economy for Sustainable Development
Namibia is transitioning towards a green economy, with various policies and initia-
tivesimplementedbythegovernmenttopromotesustainabledevelopmentandreduce
environmental risks (Lubinda 2015). Key aspects of this transition include policies
and initiatives, renewable energy adoption, waste management, and sustainable agri-
culture. According to the International Labour Organization (ILO), the Namibian
government has identiﬁed green jobs as a strategic pillar for job creation in the
revised Namibian employment policy, launched in October 2013 (ILO 2014a). The
World Economic Forum (WEF), afﬁrmed that the policy aims to create increased and
decent employment opportunities in the green economy. Namibia is exploring the
potential of renewable energy sources such as hydrogen, to grow its economy and
reduce its emissions by 91% (WEF 2021). The country is also working on improving
the renewable energy value chain in the Southern African region (Lubinda 2015).
The government is focusing on improving waste management practices, intending
to reduce environmental pollution and promote sustainable development (Lubinda
2015). Sustainable agriculture is another aspect of the green economy in Namibia,
with the potential for further growth in the future (Lubinda 2015). However, during
the transition process, Namibia faces various challenges and barriers such as the need
for a behavior change and increased responsibility in using natural resources sustain-
ably (Lubinda 2015). Additionally, the country needs to address structural chal-
lenges and constraints to achieve sustainable growth and diversiﬁcation opportunities
(Growth Lab 2023).
316
P. Mensah et al.
3.1
Strategies and Policies for Sustainable Development
Namibia has made signiﬁcant progress towards sustainable development, with
various policies and strategies implemented to promote economic, environmental and
social sustainability (UN-SDGs 2021). Key strategies and policies needed to promote
sustainable development in Namibia include national development plans, sustain-
able development goals, partnerships, and international best practices (see Table 2).
The ﬁfth National Development Plan (NDP5) focuses on economic progression,
social transformation, environmental sustainability, and good governance, which are
comprehensively integrated into the SDG pillars of people, prosperity, planet, peace,
and partnership (UN-SDGs 2021). Namibia has committed to achieving the SDGs,
which are a universal call to action to end poverty, protect the planet, and ensure that
all people enjoy peace and prosperity (Nangolo 2023). The country has prioritized the
SDG targets for 2030 and is working towards their implementation (Nangolo 2023).
Effective partnerships are however needed to address systemic and other develop-
ment challenges in the nation (UN 2023a). Thus, the UN Partnership Framework for
Namibia is an example of a strategic approach for UN cooperation to support sustain-
able development in the country (UN 2023a). Namibia can learn from international
best practices and experiences to promote sustainable development. These include
promoting sustainable practices in public procurement, strengthening scientiﬁc and
technological capacity, and enhancing capacity-building support to developing coun-
tries (UNDP 2023). However, the feasibility and effectiveness of these strategies
in the Namibian context depend on various factors such as the country’s political,
economic, and social conditions. Additionally, challenges such as limited access to
development assistance, informal settlements, and dissatisfaction with government
efforts to promote sustainable agriculture and combat climate change need to be
addressed (UN-SDGs 2021; Nangolo 2023).
3.2
Impact of Strategies on Namibia’s Economy,
Environment and Society
The transition to a green economy in Namibia has the potential to bring about signif-
icant economic beneﬁts and opportunities. The green economy is deﬁned as an
economy that results in improved human well-being and social equity, while signiﬁ-
cantly reducing environmental risks (Lubinda 2015). Examples of the green economy
in Namibia include sustainable agriculture, the trade of non-timber forestry prod-
ucts, ﬁsheries, waste management, renewable energy and sustainable tourism. Future
expansion is possible for these industries, which are also rather eco-friendly (Lubinda
2015). One of the key economic beneﬁts of the transition to a green economy is the
potential for job creation and income generation in green sectors. Namibia’s updated
employment policy speciﬁcally “the green jobs” as a strategic pillar for job develop-
ment, and the need for a broad variety of skills in the context of the green economy
An Agenda for Sustainable Development: The Role of Strategic Impact …
317
Table 2 Effectiveness of strategies and policies in Namibia
Strategies/Policies
Objectives
Proposed outcomes
National development plan
– Economic progression
– Social transformation
– Environmental sustainability
– Good governance
– Increased gross domestic
product (GDP) growth
– Reduced poverty and
inequality
– Improved environmental
quality
– Enhanced governance and
accountability
Sustainable Development
Goals
– End poverty
– Protect the planet
– Ensure peace and prosperity
for all
– Reduced poverty and hunger
– Sustainable use of natural
resources
– Peaceful and inclusive
societies
– Global partnerships for
sustainable development
Partnerships
– Address systemic and other
development challenges
– Improved coordination and
collaboration among
stakeholders
– Enhanced resource
mobilization and allocation
– Effective implementation of
sustainable development
initiatives
Green public procurement
– Enhance capacity
– Building support for
developing countries
– Increased adoption of
sustainable procurement
practices
– Reduced environmental
impact of public
procurement activities
– Enhanced social and
economic beneﬁts for local
communities
Scientiﬁc and technological
capacity
– Develop and implement tools
to monitor sustainable
development impacts
– Improved data collection and
analysis for sustainable
development monitoring
– Enhanced decision-making
and policy formulation based
on scientiﬁc evidence
– Increased public awareness
and engagement in
sustainable development
initiatives
Source: Authors’ construct based on empirical and document analyses
318
P. Mensah et al.
both domestically and internationally is rising (ILO 2014b). A green jobs assess-
ment, which will be used to prioritize and inform Namibia’s development goals and
policy interventions toward better job creation in the transition to a green economy,
will give empirical information on the country’s potential for creating green employ-
ment (ILO 2014a). In addition to job creation, the transition to a green economy can
also lead to ﬁnancial investments that are required to support the growth of green
sectors. For example, the Government of Namibia is focusing on the potential of
green energy to grow its economy and has pledged to reduce its carbon emissions
by 91% over a certain period i.e. the next ﬁve years (WEF 2021). This will require
signiﬁcant ﬁnancial investments in renewable energy infrastructure and other green
technologies. However, these investments are expected to yield a positive return on
investment in the form of reduced environmental risks, improved human well-being,
and sustainable economic growth.
The transition to a green economy, including the promotion of renewable energy
and sustainable practices, also has the potential to signiﬁcantly reduce greenhouse
gas emissions and other pollutants in Namibia. This is particularly important given
the country’s vulnerability to the impact of climate change, as evidenced by excep-
tional ﬂooding and the negative impact on sustainable development (Herunga 2023).
According to the World Wildlife Fund (WWF), the transition to a green economy
can have a positive impact on biodiversity conservation and land-use practices in
Namibia. For example, sustainable agriculture and land management practices can
help preserve natural habitats and protect biodiversity, while also promoting sustain-
able economic development (WWF 2023). The transition to a green economy can
also contribute to the mitigation of climate change and the adaptation to its effects
in Namibia. For example, the government is ﬁnalizing a national strategy on adap-
tation and mitigation to climate change, which will help guide the country’s efforts
to address the impacts of climate change and promote sustainable development
(Herunga 2023).
Besides economic and environmental impacts, the green economy can contribute
to improvements in public health, access to clean water, and sanitation. For example,
Namibia has made progress in providing access to safe drinking water in both rural
and urban areas, with an average access rate of 98% (UN-SDGs 2021). The transition
to a green economy can further improve access to clean water and sanitation for all
citizens. The green economy in Namibia is expected to be inclusive and equitable,
addressing poverty and inequality. The transition to a green economy can create
opportunities for a wide range of skills within the context of sustainable development,
beneﬁting current and future generations (Lubinda 2015). Thus, the green economy
calls for a behavior change and increased responsibility in using natural resources
sustainably (Lubinda 2015). This transformation can lead to a more sustainable and
equitable society, where all citizens are aware of the importance of preserving the
environment and natural resources for sustainable development.
An Agenda for Sustainable Development: The Role of Strategic Impact …
319
3.3
Role of Strategic Impact Assessment in Guiding
Sustainable Development
The role of SIA in guiding sustainable development is crucial, as it helps to eval-
uate the environmental consequences of proposed policies, plans, and programs. This
ensures they are fully addressed and appropriately managed at the earliest appropriate
stage of decision-making, alongside economic and social considerations (UNDP
2013). However, the review of current impact assessment methodologies provides
a systematic and transparent approach to evaluating the environmental impacts of
proposed PPPs. It also helps decision-makers incorporate environmental and other
sustainability objectives in the formulation of these PPPs. Moreover, it facilitates the
gathering and analysis of information necessary for sound decision-making including
inputs from relevant stakeholders (UNDP 2013). Despite the numerous strengths of
SIA, its weaknesses emanate from limited resources and capacity, especially in devel-
oping countries when conducting comprehensive impact assessments. There is also
lack of stakeholder engagement and participation in the impact assessment process as
well as insufﬁcient integration of social and economic aspects in the assessment (Del-
Campo et al. 2020). Impact assessment can be effective in guiding policy-making
and decision-making processes by providing a comprehensive understanding of the
potential environmental, social, and economic impacts of proposed PPPs. These
facilitate the evaluation of signiﬁcant environmental and health effects of strategic
options and proposed actions while setting conditions for environmentally sound
implementation of strategic decisions (UNDP 2013).
4
Syntheses and Observations
Namibia has undertaken voluntary SEAs between 2008 and 2013, although it is
not yet a legal mandate (Hipondoka et al. 2016). Additionally, National Planning
Commission (NPC), asserted that the country is ﬁnalizing a national strategy on
adaptation and mitigation to climate change, which may involve strategic impact
assessment (NPC 2023). Therefore, the theoretical value of the interplay between the
development of SIA legislation and the green economy transformation for sustainable
development in Namibia is compelling. SIA is an important element of Namibian
transition to a green economy which ensures the attainment of sustainable devel-
opment outcomes. For instance, the underpinned study through in-depth interviews
revealed the key principles for SIA initiatives (see Table 3).
A correlation was established by the majority of participants between national
land use policies and plans, and regional and local plans. Nevertheless, the majority
of respondents were unsure of the relationship between land use and spatial PPPs and
other sectoral PPPs, such as housing, waste management, forestry, and water supply.
Indeed, as espoused by the guidance and principles developed by OECD (2012), this
study considered the evolution of horizontal and diagonal tiering to be as important
320
P. Mensah et al.
Table 3 SEA inﬂuence on PPP decision-making in spatial planning
Impact
General trends
The forum for exchanging expert knowledge and receiving technical support for
greening land use and spatial policies and plans is offered by SEA
Direct
The possible direct socio-ecological and economic effects of the suggested land use
and spatial PPPs are predicted and analyzed by SEA
SEA aids in the creation of spatial PPPs and land usage that is more ecologically
friendly or sustainable
Opportunities for participation in land use and spatial planning decision-making are
provided by SEA to pertinent stakeholders
For instance, SEA helps to improve both vertical and horizontal tiering in project EIA
documents, plans, and land use policies
Sustainable land use planning and land management are areas in which SEA is
progressively raising public awareness and encouraging participation
Indirect The skills and abilities of individuals and organizations engaged in land use and spatial
planning have been improved by SEA
Effective land use and spatial planning have been facilitated by SEA through improved
institutional collaboration, administrative setups and learning
The land use and spatial planning process now has more social responsibility and
transparency because of SEA
SEA uses local and regional land use planning to safeguard the environment
Source Authors’ construct based on analyses of interviews
as vertical tiering if SEA is to have any signiﬁcant effect. The observation seems to
support the claim stated in research by Hipondoka et al. (2016) that Namibian land
tenure arrangements make it unlikely that planning policy or regulation will have an
impact on spatial, land use and human settlement planning. They said that land-use
plans created by approved local planning organizations are sometimes altered by
traditional leaders working with self-described planners (see Table 4).
In essence, achieving a green economy necessitates the dedication and involve-
ment of all societal sectors and investors at various phases. Key tools supporting
green investment and innovation for the transition to a sustainable economy include
planned and incorporated PPPs, strengthen institutional powers and regulatory mech-
anismsthatemphasizetheimportanceofeconomicsystemincorporatingexternalities
(Suzaul-Islam and Yanrong 2016). In the pursuit of advancing a sustainable economy,
SEA is recognized as having the power to inﬂuence the creation of strategic initia-
tives and PPPs, which holds the potential to positively impact socio-economic and
environmental sustainability (Suzaul-Islam and Yanrong 2016). Therefore, the paper
established the nexus between SEA and green economy, and their implications on
sustainability achievement (see Table 5).
Studies conducted by Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) high-
lighted the beneﬁts of sustainable economy alteration under three aspects which
emphasized that the most dominant sectors in sub-Saharan Africa are natural resource
utilization and agriculture initiatives (GIZ 2015). The report afﬁrmed that although
An Agenda for Sustainable Development: The Role of Strategic Impact …
321
Table 4 Assessing SEA’s effects on PPPs, both directly and indirectly
Impact
Measures for assessment
Sustainability concerns like adaptability and human-ecological systems are
incorporated into PPP development by SEA
Direct
The information obtained is accurately reﬂected and included into the ﬁnal PPPs
through the involvement of stakeholders in SEA
In order to provide sound transparency and accountability in the planning or
implementation of PPPs, SEA provides accurate results in a timely manner
Monitoring, control, and surveillance (MCS) are among the principles that SEA
offers to help with the PPPs’ implementation
Strategies to improve positive outcomes or minimize any negative effects are
guaranteed by SEA
SEA improves environmental and socio-economic conditions or standards of
spatial and land use PPPs
Indirect
SEA offers baseline data for usage in succeeding land use and spatial PPP
activities
Better time and cost savings are achieved during the evaluation and
decision-making process for subsequent PPPs thanks to SEA
SEA includes management practices and the overall awareness of the institution’s
actions on PPPs
SEA heightens the public consciousness of organizations as a result of the SEA
applications
Source Authors’ construct based on analyses of interviews
land use and spatial planning PPPs captured green practices and initiatives, unfor-
tunately, there is no speciﬁc green policy framework for the achievement of the
transition (GIZ 2015). This afﬁrmation led to the investigation of existing land use
and spatial planning PPPs in supporting the green economy transformation and their
effectiveness in Namibia.
Namibia, like many other countries, may have implemented or planned various
PPPs to support the green economy. These initiatives are usually based on the guide-
lines, precepts and performance standards of good practices for SEA such as those set
forth by international standards (see Table 6). An analytical template that focuses on
important aspects of SEA quality such as procedural compliance, technical quality
and inﬂuence, utility and beneﬁts, are part of the assessment technique. The ﬁnd-
ings indicated unclear legal basis for SEA in Namibia i.e. Namibia’s environmental
management act (EMA) does not explicitly mention SEA but clause 23 and 24 stip-
ulate that PPPs must prepare environmental plans in the approved format and with
the prescribed content.
The commencement of the environmental management act, 2007 and the reﬁne-
ment of listed activities for EIA regulations were announced in the Namibian govern-
ment gazette number 4872 (Republic of Namibia 2007). However, it did not prescribe
the format and manner for SEA regulations. The gazette speciﬁed the list of activi-
ties that may not be undertaken without an environmental clearance certiﬁcate and
322
P. Mensah et al.
Table 5 Principles of green economy for universal sustainability
Aspect of SEA Principles of green economy
Sustainability achievement
Economic
– Acknowledges natural capital and
principles
– Establishes decent and green jobs
– Integrates growth and economic
development models
– Facilitates resource and energy efﬁciency
– Takes externalities internally
– Reduced poverty and
inequality
– Enhanced economic growth
and employment, leading to
skill development
– Creation of new markets,
trade balances and
specialization
– Enhanced energy security,
competitiveness and
productivity
Social
– Reduces poverty and improves
livelihoods—Ensures well-being, social
protection and access to essential services
– Promotes socially inclusive, democratic,
stable, accountable, transparent or
participatory decision-making
– Ensures and equitable, fair and just society
– Reduced poverty and
inequality
– Reduced social inequality
– Enhanced job opportunities
– Enhanced skill development
through training
– Better condition of public
services
– Improved health outcomes
Environmental – Protects biodiversity and ecosystem
– Invests in and sustains natural capital
– Recognizes and respects planetary
boundaries and ecological limits
– Advances international environmental
sustainability goals such as SDGs
– Reduced greenhouse gas and
other emissions
– Sustainable natural assets and
resource management
– Adaption to climate change
and resilience to hazards
– Enhanced environmental
quality
Source Authors’ construct based on analyses of interviews
the EIA regulations under the environmental management act, 2007 (MET 2013).
The weaknesses in the studied SEA imply that the people who commissioned the
SEA were either unaware of these fundamental guidelines for establishing terms
of reference or gave them scant consideration. It is apparent that majority of the
SEA that were assessed lacked a clear knowledge of the functions, possibilities, and
modes of action of SEA as well as how it ought to be used to assist in decision-
making. Therefore, when MET promulgates SEA laws, it is imperative that it start a
program to raise awareness among pertinent national government ofﬁces (the source
of the majority of PPPs) and the incorporated Namibian environmental assessment
consultant sectors.
An Agenda for Sustainable Development: The Role of Strategic Impact …
323
Table 6 Namibia’s green economy supporting policies
SEA and publication data
Proponent
Focus of PPP
Windhoek and townlands
2011
City of windhoek
Zoning: addressed over a
ten-year period the criteria for
the city’s development
ambitions
Millennium challenge
account (MCA) Namibia
compact 2008
MCA Namibia
Program: encouraged the
creation of a grant proposal for
a ﬁve-year program in Namibia
with the goal of lowering
poverty by promoting
economic growth
Combatting bush
encroachment for Namibia’s
development (CBEND) 2009
National planning commission
and desert research foundation
of Namibia
Program: evaluated the
amount of energy produced by
the invading bush that has taken
over most of central Namibia in
an attempt to increase
rangeland productivity. It is
anticipated that a single power
plant will produce roughly 0.25
megawatts (MW) of energy; its
feasibility will improve the
upscaling to 120 and 300
power plants
Karas integrated land use
plan (KIRLUP) 2011
Ministry of lands and
resettlement (MLR) and GIZ
Zoning: tied to a regional land
use zoning; evaluated the
KIRLUP’s recommendations
and ideas, encompassing the
creation of sustainable
solutions and determining the
ability of the area’s natural
resources to create the land
uses that most closely match
the potential
Integrated coastal zone
management of the
erongo-kunene regions 2008
and 2012 (revised)
Namibian coast conservation
and management (NACOMA)
at directorate of environmental
affairs (DEA)/Ministry of
environment and tourism
(MET)
Policy: sought to direct and
assist in shaping decisions on
matters pertaining to land use
planning (MLR), development
planning (Regional Council),
and biodiversity conservation
(MET) in the coastal areas of
the Kunene and Erongo
Regions. A few marine-related
concerns were also covered,
including oil spills and whale
conservation
Source Authors’ construct based on empirical and document analyses
324
P. Mensah et al.
5
Implications and Conclusion
The shift to a green economy has the ability to mitigate risks to the economy, society,
and environment while also enhancing all economic sectors in a sustainable manner.
Such a shift is pertinent for Namibia, a nation that is extremely sensitive to the
effects of climate change because it depends heavily on the natural environment for
its survival. The study’s ﬁndings demonstrate that Namibia’s SIA laws have a great
deal of promise for greening the country’s economy. Therefore, it is crucial that
policymakers implement plans that may both help address the dangers and vulner-
abilities and help capitalize on the possibilities and strengths. Thus, the potential
improvements or recommendations for a more robust impact assessment framework
in guiding sustainable development entail four main ways. First, it is important to
enhance stakeholder engagement and participation in the impact assessment process
to ensure a more inclusive and transparent approach (Del-Campo et al. 2020). Second,
the social and economic aspects should be integrated more effectively in the assess-
ment, recognizing the interdependence between environmental, social, and economic
factors (OECD 2012). Third, the capacity of governments and stakeholders should
be strengthened to conduct comprehensive impact assessments, especially in devel-
oping countries (Del-Campo et al. 2020). And ﬁnally, the use of strategic impact
assessment should be promoted as a tool for development PPPs, recognizing its
potential beneﬁts in promoting sustainable development (UNDP 2013). In conclu-
sion, SIA plays a crucial role in guiding sustainable development by evaluating the
environmental consequences of proposed PPPs. However, there are strengths and
weaknesses in current impact assessment methodologies, and improvements can be
madetoenhancetheeffectivenessofimpactassessmentinguidingpolicy-makingand
decision-making processes. By addressing these weaknesses and implementing the
recommended improvements, the impact assessment framework can become more
robust and effective in promoting sustainable development.
References
African Development Bank Group (2018) Private sector green growth strategies from Rwanda and
Ethiopia are models to emulate
Broman GI, Robèrt KH (2017) A framework for strategic sustainable development. J Clean Prod
140:17–31
Cooper A, Mukonza C, Fisher E, Mulugetta Y, Gebreeyesus M, Onuoha M, Okereke C et al (2020)
Mapping academic literature on governing inclusive green growth in Africa: geographical biases
and topical gaps. Sustainability 12(5):1956
Del-Campo AG, Gazzola P, Onyango V (2020) The mutualism of strategic environmental
assessment and sustainable development goals. Environ Impact Assess Rev 82:106383
Fischer TB, González A (2021) Strategic environmental assessment: a conceptual framework for
enhancing development project outcomes. Environ Impact Assess Rev 86:106502. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.eiar.2020.106502
An Agenda for Sustainable Development: The Role of Strategic Impact …
325
George TE, Karatu K, Edward A (2020) An evaluation of the environmental impact assess-
ment practice in Uganda: challenges and opportunities for achieving sustainable develop-
ment. Heliyon 6(9)
Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (2015) Beneﬁts of a green economy transformation
in sub-Saharan Africa, Namibia
Growth Lab (2023) Promoting sustainable and inclusive prosperity in Namibia. Harvard University
HerungaU(2023)Statementtotheeighteenthsessionofthecommissiononsustainabledevelopment
(CSD-18). Republic of Namibia, Ministry of Environment and Tourism
Hipondoka MHT, Dalal-Clayton DB, Van Gils H (2016) Lessons learnt from voluntary strategic
environmental assessments (SEAs) in Namibia. Impact Assess Proj Apprais 34(3):199–213.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09640568.2015.1126929
Ibeh C, Walmsley B (2021) The role of impact assessment in achieving the sustainable development
goals in Africa. In: IAIA21 smartening impact assessment in challenging times. International
Association for Impact Assessment (IAIA) 2021 conference, pp 1–15. https://doi.org/10.17868/
77131
International Labour Organization (2014a) Namibia: job creation in the green economy
International Labour Organization. (2014b) Namibian employment policy
Islam T, Zhang Y (2018) Strategic environmental assessment in developing countries: a review.
Environ Impact Assess Rev 68:1–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eiar.2017.10.001
Jensen N, Kelly AH, Avendano M (2021) The COVID-19 pandemic underscores the need for an
equity-focused global health agenda. HumIties Soc Sci Commun 8(1)
Lubinda H (2015) Namibia’s green economy: policies, practices and initiatives. University of
Namibia Press, Windhoek
Ministry of Environment and Tourism (2013) Environmental management act
Nangolo J (2023) The level of implementation of sustainable development goals in Namibia towards
the 2030 sustainable development. Electr Mark Manag Namib Botsw Hitachi Energy
National Planning Commission (2023) Draft III national monitoring and evaluation policy for
Namibia
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (2012) Strategic environmental
assessment and land use planning: an international evaluation
Republic of Namibia (2007) 2007. Government gazette of the Republic of Namibia, Environmental
Management Act
Sachs JD, Lafortune G, Fuller G, Drumm E (2023) Implementing the SDG stimulus. In: Sustainable
development report
Suzaul-Islam MD, Yanrong Z (2016) Strategic environmental assessment and sustainable develop-
ment: climate change perspective. J Earth Sci Clim Chang 7(12):1000379
United Nations (2023a) Namibia’s second voluntary national review report on the implementation
of the sustainable development goals towards Agenda 2030
United Nations (2023b) Our work on the sustainable development goals in Namibia: how the UN
is supporting the sustainable development goals in Namibia
United Nations Development Programme (2013) Strategic environmental assessment: good practice
guidance for development co-operation
United Nations Development Programme (2023) Annual report 2023. Retrieved from https://www.
undp.org/publications/undp-annual-report-2023
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa (2023) Enabling measures for an inclusive green
economy in Africa
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (2021) Namibia’s progress towards sustainable
development
Wanner M (2015) The political economy of the green economy: a global perspective. In: The green
economy. Springer, Berlin, pp 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-06376-2_1
World Economic Forum (2021) Namibia’s energy transition: moving from policy to climate action
World Wildlife Fund (2023) Sustainable agriculture in Namibia. Retrieved from https://www.wor
ldwildlife.org/places/namibia
The Role of Urban Design in Achieving
the UN SDGs
Şebnem Hoşkara and Özge Selen Koç
Abstract The impact of growing inequality and poverty among nations on spatial
and social concerns has become critical, leading to environmental and humanitarian
crises like pollution, resource depletion, and unemployment, which hinder urban
development and sustainable growth. Addressing climate issues is urgent due to
their global repercussions, prompting a search for comprehensive solutions globally.
Various action plans and agendas, from Our Common Future to the 2030 Agenda, aim
to enhance quality of life through environmental awareness, development strategies,
technological innovation, and social structure change. Existing research provides a
framework to examine how the 2030 Agenda and Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) serve as tools for sustainable urban development. However, there is insuf-
ﬁcient data on how urban design dimensions and objectives interact with SDGs,
which is critical for urban sustainability. This research aims to propose a supple-
mentary methodological framework for analyzing, graphically representing, and
assessing the impact of urban design on SDGs. It demonstrates an integrated assess-
ment framework for addressing urban design’s multidimensionality in a structured
manner, revealing its role in achieving the SDGs. The methodology involves a litera-
ture review of relevant documents on sustainable development processes, goals, and
urban design dimensions and objectives to analyze and evaluate the impact of urban
design on SDGs using qualitative research methods. The collected data underwent
cross-concept analysis incorporating rankings and narratives. The discussion then
focuses on how SDGs are embedded in urban design through coding.
Keywords 2030 agenda · Sustainable development goals (SDGs) · Urban design ·
Urban design dimensions
¸S. Ho¸skara (B) · Ö. S. Koç
Department of Architecture, Eastern Mediterranean University (EMU) (Mersin 10, Turkey),
Famagusta, Cyprus
e-mail: sebnem.hoskara@emu.edu.tr
Ö. S. Koç
e-mail: 20600034@emu.edu.tr
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_20
327
328
¸S. Ho¸skara and Ö. S. Koç
1
Introduction
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development stands as a comprehensive strategy
aimed at fostering prosperity while respecting the environment and its inhabitants.
This universal and inclusive agenda, centered on human rights, offers a transfor-
mative and integrated action plan for nations, United Nations organizations, and
various stakeholders. Aligned with the principles of sustainability, the 2030 Agenda
encompasses a set of goals designed to ensure the well-being of both people and the
planet. It presents new opportunities for the built environment to prioritize sustain-
ability and adapt to future challenges. Furthermore, the Agenda promotes global
peace, aims to eradicate poverty, and addresses inequalities within and between
countries. To achieve its objectives, the 2030 Agenda emphasizes coordinated and
comprehensive sustainable development across economic, social, and environmental
dimensions. It builds upon the achievements of the Millennium Development Goals
while endeavoring to address unﬁnished challenges.
Central to the Agenda are the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and
their associated targets, forming a shared action plan of unprecedented scope. These
goals,focusingonpeople,theplanet,prosperity,partnership,andpeace,seektocreate
conditions conducive to meeting basic human needs and fostering progress in areas
such as industry and innovation. Despite the collaborative spirit encouraged by the
SDGs, some disciplines, such as architecture, urban design, and urban planning, have
not always been fully recognized for their role in achieving sustainability objectives.
While often associated with SDG 11 (Sustainable Cities and Communities), these
disciplines play a crucial role in advancing all SDGs with a holistic perspective.
Accordingly, the primary aim of this research is to explore the role of urban
design in achieving the SDGs and their targets. Speciﬁcally, the paper will examine
how urban design can contribute to harmonizing three core elements of sustainable
development: economic growth, social inclusion, and environmental protection. In
the context of rapid technological and industrial advancements, urban design has
emerged as a critical tool for addressing ecological imbalances and preserving natural
resources. It entails the creation of successful places that prioritize consistency and
balance between urban planning and architectural disciplines, thereby enhancing the
quality of life. While existing research provides a framework for understanding the
relationship between the 2030 Agenda, SDGs, and urban development, there remains
a gap in understanding the interaction between urban design principles and SDG
targets. Addressing this gap is crucial for ensuring sustainable urban development
and shaping the future of cities.
The Role of Urban Design in Achieving the UN SDGs
329
2
Concept of Sustainability
Sustainability is a concept that encompasses social issues such as poverty and health
problems, as well as environmental challenges such as climate change and biodi-
versity loss. It is concerned with making decisions about these issues. Sustainable
development should be considered a crucial step in human progress. The concept of
sustainable development was introduced in the 1987 report “Our Common Future”
by the World Commission on Environment and Development. The United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development converted it into a comprehensive
theoretical system with “Agenda 21” in 1992, and it was recognized as a common
approach in most countries. The Brundtland Report stated that poverty, unsustainable
consumption, and production habits were inﬂuential in bringing sustainable devel-
opment to the agenda. To solve critical environmental and socioeconomic-based
problems, the report combined development and environmental issues, which called
for the creation of a concept of sustainable development to develop joint solution
proposals. The report deﬁnes sustainable development as “a development that meets
the needs of today without compromising the ability of future generations to meet
theirownneeds”(WCED1987:15–17).Accordingtothereport,povertyisexpanding
rapidly, technology and social progress are limiting people’s lives, and sustainable
development will provide an opportunity to meet everyone’s basic needs and fulﬁll
desires for a better life as a solution proposal. Although sustainable development is
deﬁned in many ways, it is considered a method aimed at promoting awareness of
society’s environmental, social, and economic concerns and addressing needs in this
direction. The outcomes of sustainable development are not always predictable in
a particular order. It is a processed product, and through experiential learning, this
process has formed a dynamic structure. For this purpose, it is a solution-producing
approach that chooses the best available way that beneﬁts everyone. The dynamic
structure of sustainable development includes adopting and implementing sustain-
able development principles in all areas for different organizations, policies, opera-
tions, and people. The requirement for equality between other groups, sectors, and
generations is at the core of the sustainable development approach.
Moreover, generational equality can also be assembled with a better expression.
While emphasizing the importance of intergenerational equality, people belonging to
different political, economic, social, and geographical contexts must have the same
rights. The scope of the concept of sustainable development has primarily been
focused on environmental issues and ecological concerns and gained increasing
prominence as a source of inspiration for many kinds of research over time, and
thus can be managed to answer the question of what the dimensions of sustainable
development are. It is recognized that growth through sustainable development must
be both an inclusive participatory and environmentally friendly process to reduce
poverty, establish shared prosperity for those living on earth, respond to human
needs, environmental sustainability, human rights, and partnerships, and continue to
meet the needs of future generations. As a result, the three key pillars of sustain-
able development were highlighted: economic growth, environmental management,
330
¸S. Ho¸skara and Ö. S. Koç
and social inclusion. Although sustainable development encompasses all sectors of
development, considering the impact of urban design on the environment and social
behavior, it might be regarded as one of the essential tools for achieving sustainable
development. The most recent attempt in this direction is the Agenda 2030 mani-
festo, adopted in 2015. The central theme of Agenda 2030 is “no one is left behind,”
in line with this purpose, 17 Sustainable Development Goals and 169 Targets have
been set.
2.1
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
Unlike the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), the SDGs provide a more
speciﬁc and comprehensive perspective on such problems and respond to the human
and natural system needs from a broader point of view (Kumar et al. 2016). In
this regard, a comprehensive and integrative common understanding has emerged to
answer these concerns. Thus, the SDGs have provided the opportunity to create a
common language around ﬁve main themes (people, planet, prosperity, peace, and
partnerships) that all countries and communities can use. The SDGs also provide a
better connection and utilization of sustainable development’s economic, social, and
environmental dimensions and an opportunity to initiate systemic change toward
a more sustainable future. It has been predicted that the SDGs will substantially
impact policy, capital ﬂows, and development policies since their publication. The
aims of the agenda seem to be more comprehensive than those of earlier develop-
ment initiatives because they consider the international community, including corpo-
rations, non-governmental organizations, and research institutions, directly respon-
sible for achieving development. Thus, it has been observed that attaining these goals
builds the framework for new partnerships between the business, public, and research
sectors. After adopting the agenda, researchers have generally focused on exploring,
analyzing, and examining the SDGs and their interactions with other disciplines
and implementation experience. According to Sachs (2012), a solid problem-solving
network should be proposed to ensure sustainable development, including univer-
sities, companies, non-governmental organizations, governments, and, most impor-
tantly, the world’s younger generation. SDGs’ inclusive and integrative approaches
have been further developed. After the participation of different sectors and genera-
tions was mentioned, the involvement of different socioeconomic groups also became
increasingly important. Kumi et al. (2014) highlighted three main concerns in their
work and aimed to use them as a guideline for operational policies aligned with the
SDGs. First, when it comes to poor communities, the focus should be on the pro-
poverty rather than the traditional pro-growth. Then equality should be identiﬁed as a
serious concern, and lastly, the concerns and problems of these communities should
be responded to with appropriate actions taken in this direction. (Bai et al. 2016).
Jayasuriya’s study (2001) emphasized the evolving role of social workers in
promoting social equity and development. She argued that social workers must
broaden their scope to include responsibilities related to economic development,
The Role of Urban Design in Achieving the UN SDGs
331
human rights, and environmental sustainability. This perspective aligns with the
principles later outlined in the SDGs, which provide a comprehensive framework
for addressing socioeconomic disparities and ensuring equal access to opportunities
and resources.
The agenda of the SDGs has signiﬁcantly impacted social roles and equity,
particularly in the ﬁeld of social work. Recent studies highlight the importance
of expanding social workers’ responsibilities to encompass social and economic
development, human rights, and environmental sustainability. According to Jones
and Truell (2012), the SDGs provide a comprehensive framework that addresses
issues of socioeconomic division and promotes equal access and outcomes. This
expanded scope of social work is crucial for effectively tackling contemporary global
challenges and fostering a more equitable society.
Many studies have attempted to provide a comprehensive overview and integrated
approach to implementing the SDGs. Accordingly, many different partnerships are
required (Kroll et al. 2019), and Stafford-Smith et al. (2016) drew attention to the
linkage between three main areas: sectors, agencies, and countries. According to the
Future World of Science overview’s sustainability practice, the 17 SDGs should cover
seven categories to develop these links: ﬁnancial, technology, competence, political
integrity, partnerships, and the application of data, monitoring, and accountability in
the data ﬁeld.
On the other hand, Caiado et al. (2018) criticized the comprehensive review of
the existing literature and the role of individual urban areas in achieving the SDGs.
According to them, the differences in the needs and experiences of the urban space
caused difﬁculties in achieving the SDG goals. They also emphasized the role of
information technology in addressing SDGs’ targets, concentrating on aspects of
sustainability science and information management, as well as their applications and
linkages. As a result, the research recommended several methods to address some of
the challenges affecting the implementation of the 17 SDGs while focusing on the
gaps in the ﬁeld. In this perspective, by 2030, practically all issues will be addressed
through implementing goals (17 goals), targets (169 targets), and indicators. When
considering the 17 SDGs adopted by UN countries in 2015 (Fig. 1), it becomes
evident that most goals and targets are inextricably linked to urban design strate-
gies, with the 17 goals collectively aiming to “make cities and human settlements
inclusive, safe, resilient, and sustainable.“ These goals underscore the signiﬁcance of
sustainableurbandevelopment,disasterriskreduction,sustainabletransportsystems,
and inclusive urbanization. For instance, creating green spaces, improving public
transportation networks, and promoting participatory urban planning processes are
crucial measures that contribute to environmental sustainability and social equity
within urban settings. Consequently, urban design strategies are paramount in effec-
tively implementing the SDGs, as they demonstrate their crucial role in addressing
contemporary global challenges.
332
¸S. Ho¸skara and Ö. S. Koç
Fig. 1 The 17 sustainable development goals (https://worldslargestlesson.globalgoals.org/)
3
Urban Design and Its Dimensions
Urban design has been recognized as a signiﬁcant ﬁeld within the city planning
and design professions since the 1960s. Urban design concepts and practices have
progressed into a specialized and effective profession that merges planning, archi-
tecture, and landscape architecture. The classiﬁcation of urban design is further
complex by its wide range of activities, ranging from minor neighborhood improve-
ments and design to large-scale development projects, community strategies, and
even regional networks. Urban design is an important concept that requires inter-
disciplinary collaboration and should promote physical and social integrity. Thus,
urban design is generally conducted by groups of people with various specializa-
tions and ideologies. As a response to increasing health, housing, transportation,
and other urban crises, modern urban design theory emerged in the late 1920s. The
Congress Internationaux d’Architecture Moderne, or CIAM, was founded in 1928
by Le Corbusier and other architects and planners to examine subjects and models
for contemporary, rational city development. Their criticisms were primarily philo-
sophic and strategic concerns on what a city should be based on theory and assump-
tion rather than understanding people’s interactions with their surroundings. Unfor-
tunately, largescale urban regeneration and theoretical models failed due to a lack
of human aspects and strict rules when new contemporary urbanism models were
applied. Considering the neglected part of these theoretical urban design models,
researchers such as Jane Jacobs, Edward Hall, and Lewis Mumford led to a discus-
sion on the impact of the physical environment on community life. Gordon Cullen in
his book Townscape (Cullen 1961) established that combining buildings, streets,
and open spaces is more signiﬁcant than single architectural monuments in shaping
our perception of urban values. Then, Kevin Lynch in his book The Image of the
The Role of Urban Design in Achieving the UN SDGs
333
City (Lynch 1960) and others introduced theories that allowed designers to concep-
tualize and visualize greater urban forms and landscape-scaled components. In light
of these 1960 and 1970s perspectives, research approaches and methodology estab-
lishedastrongbaseforurbandesigntheoryandpractice.However,themainchallenge
was that discipline was still considered expert-focused.
While urban design was inﬂuential in transforming a wide variety of public
realms into physical development, there needed to be a participatory decision-making
process to examine the implications of physical design solutions regarding shared
values and objectives. As a result, the role of urban design in the planning process
has increased in recent years, emphasizing the necessity for interdisciplinary struc-
tured action for the future of cities. The inﬂuence of social variables in urban design
should be examined to create human-oriented environments and improve existing
ones. Urban design is a ﬁeld of study that requires creating a strategy for a commu-
nity and mobilizing all skills and resources to bring that vision to life. The growth
of the urban population and the diversiﬁcation of individual needs over time, as
well as the fact that these changes will continue in the future, have demonstrated
the signiﬁcance of the time dimension in the urban design process (Elshater 2012).
The concern that cities will experience due to the high quality of life and living
standards that will emerge in the coming years strengthens the importance of urban
design (Yeang 2000). The signiﬁcance of urban design in investigating and solving
problems in cities is expanding in response to the continuing growth of cities, the
rapid increase in population, and the continuation of development. The difﬁculties of
the uncontrollability of cities caused by rapid urbanization are insufﬁcient to respond
to the methods used in urban design.
Cities are constantly changing due to expanding population and built environ-
ment daily, and by responding to these changes, they create a development pattern.
The discipline of urban design has emerged to maximize people’s living standards
and conditions. When the process of urban planning is examined, the main aim
of each pioneer is to raise living conditions and improve living environments. The
basic principle of urban design results from this relationship between people and
their meaningful environment. This section categorized urban design into six dimen-
sions according to Matthew Carmona’s classiﬁcation in his book Public Places—
Urban Spaces (Carmona and Wunderlich 2013; Carmona 2021). These dimensions
are components of a whole. For this research, the dimensions of urban design are
distributed in eight main sections—morphological dimension, perceptual dimen-
sion, social dimension, visual dimension, functional dimension, temporal dimension,
design governance, and place production—with brief explanations and then matched
with the SDGs.
334
¸S. Ho¸skara and Ö. S. Koç
4
Methodological Approach
This research endeavored to provide a framework for examining how the SDGs
and the 2030 Agenda serve as instruments for sustainable urban development. The
study sought to categorize the SDGs’ dimensions and elements according to speciﬁc
criteria and to determine their relative signiﬁcance in the theory and practice of urban
design. In this context, the study was conducted in the following stages (Fig. 2):
In the initial stage of the study, theoretical and documentary research was
conducted through a literature review to understand and explore the concepts under
study: urban design and the SDGs. This review utilized the databases Google Scholar,
Web of Science, and JSTOR, with a majority of sources from Routledge. The
keywords “urban design”, “sustainable development goals”, “SDGs”, “urban plan-
ning”, and “sustainability” were applied to identify relevant literature. The search
was limited to 34 relevant books, book reviews, reports, and articles, along with
one primary source (Appendix 1). The selected articles were among the most cited
primary sources, and similar content articles were excluded from the evaluation. The
articles were generally categorized into two groups: theoretical approaches to urban
design and practical application areas.
In the second step of the process, the collected data on urban design and the 169
targets of SDGs were interconnected through a coding system created through a
comprehensive literature review. This involves identifying keywords for each SDG
using concepts (Appendix 2). Subsequently, the generated codes were utilized to
analyze the data through the MaxQDA qualitative data analysis software to determine
the relationship between the two concepts. The concept of urban design, through its
dimensions and elements, was incorporated into the analysis software in the form
of written text, and data were collected on whether the codes deﬁned for the SDGs
existed in these texts and, if so, how many times they were repeated.
Fig. 2 Research process stages
The Role of Urban Design in Achieving the UN SDGs
335
In the third step of the process, the assessment matrix (Table 1) categorized the
critical elements of urban design dimensions (in the ﬁrst two columns), aiming to
determine the consistency of each category with the 17 SDGs (the ﬁrst row). Whether
directly or indirectly, elements that could meet the SDGs were identiﬁed and color-
coded according to their social, economic, and environmental impacts. Red denoted
the social impact, blue signiﬁed the economic impact, and green represented the envi-
ronmental impact. Yellow was used to represent SDG 11 speciﬁcally, as it encom-
passed all the keywords of the targets and showed a similarity between 88 and 96%
in terms of application and theory. Different shades of red, blue, and green were
utilized to indicate the varying levels of relevance of the urban design elements to
the SDG targets. Light shades represented low relevance (7–37%), medium shades
indicated moderate relevance (37–63%), and dark shades signiﬁed high relevance
(63–100%).
In the section where evaluations of the results were prepared, separate matrices
were constructed to illustrate the relationship between each dimension and the SDGs
based on the data obtained from the analysis tool regarding code repetition. The
content of the code system for each dimension was developed by considering the
deﬁnitions of concepts in previous studies, as well as ﬁndings and examples of appli-
cations in urban areas. For instance, speciﬁc codes were created for each SDG to
Table 1 Complete criteria for evaluating the SDGs and urban design dimensions in the matrix
format
336
¸S. Ho¸skara and Ö. S. Koç
determine the relationship between urban design dimensions and SDGs based on the
source Public Places, Urban Spaces: The Dimensions of Urban Design by Carmona
et al. (2003). SDG 1 was coded as A1 and included elements such as poverty, social
protection, inequality, and vulnerable groups. SDG 2 was coded as A2, focusing on
food security, agriculture, nutrition, sustainable farming, and resilient crop produc-
tion. Similarly, SDG 3 was coded as A3, encompassing health, well-being, disease
prevention, universal health coverage, and maternal and child health. These codes
facilitated the analysis by aligning urban design dimensions with relevant SDG
targets, providing a structured approach to assess their interconnections.
The codes representing the dimensions and ﬁndings from the literature review
were evaluated using the qualitative analysis tool MaxQDA. The relationship of
each dimension to the SDGs was rated from 1 (minimum) to 8 (maximum). The
codes were added to the code system via Excel, and the number of matches was
extracted. Thus, 1 represents the lowest relation level, while 8 represents the highest.
Studying each urban design dimension related to the SDGs made evaluating urban
design’s overall relationship to the SDGs possible. Accordingly, each dimension of
urban design has been explored and discussed in relation to the SDGs through the
developed ranking system and narratively, focusing on the social, economic, and
environmental dimensions of sustainable development. All this analysis has also
been presented visually in ﬁgures.
5
Relationship Between Urban Design Dimensions
and the SDGs
5.1
Morphological Dimension and the SDGs
To ensure the functionality, aesthetics, and continuity of urban areas, the morpho-
logical dimension focuses on the conﬁguration of land and streets within the city and
region, land utilization, and the physical characteristics and organization of build-
ings. In this context, fundamental urban design decisions, such as suitable housing,
parks, green spaces, educational centers, libraries, agricultural and commercial areas,
and infrastructure development in urban areas, become effective methods to achieve
SDGs. These goals encompass concerns ranging from urban form and characteristics,
urban and regional land uses, and street scale to the physical attributes of buildings.
The initial evaluation matrix, which assesses the morphological dimension, has
unveiled the following key ﬁndings: SDG11 (Sustainable Cities and Communities)
emerges as the most pertinent goal, trailed by SDG9 (Industry, Innovation, and Infras-
tructure), SDG7 (Affordable and Clean Energy), SDG6 (Clean Water and Sanitation),
SDG13 (Climate Action), and then SDG15 (Life on Land). SDG7 (Affordable and
Clean Energy), SDG6 (Clean Water and Sanitation), and SDG13 (Climate Action)
are highlighted based on concerns regarding energy efﬁciency and infrastructure.
Subsequently, SDG15 (Life on Land) is underscored for its focus on protecting and
The Role of Urban Design in Achieving the UN SDGs
337
Fig. 3 Correlation between the morphological dimension of urban design and the SDGs
restoring green spaces, followed by SDG10 (Reduced Inequality) due to concerns
about diminishing social disparities. The table shows other SDGs directly or indi-
rectly related (Fig. 3). As a result of the examination of the morphological dimension,
it was concluded that 62.5% (Score: 5) of the data in the relevant code system was
related to the SDGs.
Therefore, appropriate land use, environmentally friendly building structures,
sustainable infrastructure, green spaces, and community-oriented social arrange-
ments are essential for achieving the SDGs.
5.2
Perceptual Dimension and the SDGs
The perceptual dimension, encompassing elements such as the sense and under-
standing of the city and how people use it, is rooted in individual and community
experiences. It is related to the unique characteristics of the place, including its
cultural and historical heritage, natural environment, and human interaction. In this
context, urban concerns such as preserving the unique identities of cities, sustaining
cultural heritage, and clarifying the relationship between spaces should be recognized
as effective methods for achieving SDGs.
Intheperceptual dimensionandSDGrelationships addressedinthesecondassess-
ment matrix, SDG11 (Sustainable Cities and Communities) emerged as the most rele-
vant goal, followed by SDG16 (Peace, Justice, and Strong Institutions) and SDG17
(Partnership for the Goals). This is due to decisions supporting the relationship
338
¸S. Ho¸skara and Ö. S. Koç
Fig. 4 Relationship between the perceptual dimension of urban design and the SDGs
between governments, civil society organizations, and the private sector, with the
principle of transparent and equal services for all, thereby supporting the creation of
urban areas designed according to the needs of society. These goals are followed by
SDG3 (Good Health and Well-Being), SDG4 (Quality Education), SDG5 (Gender
Equality), and SDG10 (Reducing Inequality). These goals are driven by concerns
aboutsafeaccesstogreenspacesandessentialservices,increasedaccesstoeducation,
and establishing libraries and education centers to promote awareness and a sense
of belonging. Subsequently, SDG8 (Decent Work and Economic Growth) stands out
due to the impact of accessibility, employment, and economic growth. At the same
time, SDG14 (Life below Water) and SDG15 (Life on Land) are the most relevant
targets due to people’s sense of belonging to the local ecosystem and the natural
environment in their regions. The table indicates other SDGs that are partly directly
or indirectly related. Based on the examination of the dimension, it was concluded
that it is related to the SDGs at a rate of 50% (score: 4), according to the data in the
relevant code system (Fig. 4).
5.3
Social Dimension and the SDGs
The primary goal of addressing the social dimension is to design urban areas to
enhance community life, promote social interaction, and reduce social inequalities.
It promotes equal opportunities and access to resources for all segments of society
in the city and includes essential elements affecting community participation and
The Role of Urban Design in Achieving the UN SDGs
339
Fig. 5 Relationship between the social dimension of urban design and the SDGs
well-being. Concerns such as accessible and usable parks, streets, alleys, and urban
green spaces, the organization of transportation systems, and the development of
solidarity are also addressed. In this context, urban issues such as community partic-
ipation, equality of opportunity and resources, and well-being should be recognized
as effective means of achieving SDGs. SDG11 (Sustainable Cities and Communi-
ties) was identiﬁed as the most relevant goal due to the role of public space provi-
sion in community interaction. At the same time, SDG3 (Good Health and Well
Being), SDG4 (Quality Education), SDG5 (Gender Equality), and SDG10 (Reduced
Inequality) were highlighted due to concerns such as increasing access to accessible
green spaces, health, and education services, and other essential resources. Then,
with a focus on social inclusion, justice, security, civil society engagement, accessible
transportation, employment, andeconomicgrowthincentives, SDG7(Affordableand
Clean Energy), SDG8 (Decent Work and Economic Growth), SDG16 (Peace, Justice,
and Strong Institutions), and SDG17 (Partnership for the Goals) were pursued. The
third matrix table shows the other SDGs to which it is directly or indirectly related.
Based on the data in the code system, this dimension is highly relevant to the SDGs,
scoring 7 out of 8 (87.5%) (Fig. 5).
5.4
Visual Dimension and the SDGs
The visual dimension encompasses crucial elements that determine urban areas’
aesthetic quality, visual appeal, and environmental compatibility. It focuses on the
340
¸S. Ho¸skara and Ö. S. Koç
physical layout, urban identities, character, structure, and the aesthetic relationship
between open and closed spaces. In this way, it enhances the order and durability
of urban spaces and encourages interaction with nature. By increasing the order
and durability of urban spaces, this approach also promotes interaction with nature,
effectively achieving SDGs. The design and improvement of the physical quality
of urban areas promote environmental sustainability by providing a healthy envi-
ronment and enhancing well-being. This is why SDG11 (Sustainable Cities and
Communities) is the most relevant target. This is followed by SDG 8 (Decent Work
and Economic Growth) and SDG 9 (Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure). These
goals emphasize that improving the physical environment can enhance the attractive-
ness of urban spaces, increase the competitiveness of cities, and promote industrial
innovation. The incorporation of green spaces in urban areas has a positive impact on
the overall health of the population, promoting physical activity. This relates to SDG3
(Good Health and Well-Being). Additionally, incorporating hard and soft landscape
elements into design concerns can eliminate environmental pollution and improve
the natural environment, ecosystem, and water quality. This relates to SDG6 (Clean
Water and Sanitation), SDG14 (Life below Water), and SDG15 (Life on Land). The
fourth matrix table in the assessment illustrates the association with other SDGs that
are directly or indirectly relevant. Based on the code system data, 37.5% (Score: 3)
of this dimension relates to SDGs. (Fig. 6).
Fig. 6 Relationship between the visual dimension of urban design and the SDGs
The Role of Urban Design in Achieving the UN SDGs
341
5.5
Functional Dimension and the SDGs
The ﬁfth matrix table explores the relationship between the SDGs and the func-
tional dimension, focusing on the effectiveness and utilization of urban areas. This
dimension includes services and urban systems created to meet people’s daily needs.
This dimension consists of ﬁve main components: public spaces, diversity, security,
vibrancy, and vitality, as well as the capital web. For this reason, the main objec-
tives include being accessible to everyone, not neglecting the needs of different
social, cultural, and ethnic groups, ensuring the dynamic structure of urban spaces,
and addressing design concerns that promote various social, cultural, artistic, and
economic activities. It also involves engaging various actors such as businesses,
institutions, local governments, and cultural and educational facilities. Due to these
concerns, it can be considered a key component in creating sustainable cities and
societies and is highly relevant to SDG11 (Sustainable Cities and Communities).
Furthermore, due to its diversity and inclusiveness, it can be argued that it has a strong
relationship with SDG10 (Reduced Inequality), SDG1, SDG16 (Peace, Justice, and
Strong Institutions), and SDG17 (Partnership for the Goals). In addition, design deci-
sions that aim to enhance the vibrancy of cities are related to SDG8 (Decent Work
and Economic Growth) and are a potential driver for the city’s economic growth.
The ﬁfth matrix table includes other indirectly related SDGs. According to the code
system, this dimension is related to the SDGs by 62.5% (Score: 5) (Fig. 7).
Fig. 7 Relationship between the functional dimension of urban design and the SDGs
342
¸S. Ho¸skara and Ö. S. Koç
5.6
Temporal Dimension and the SDGs
The sixth table in the matrix shows the relationship between the SDGs and the
temporal dimension. This dimension concerns how urban design changes and evolves
with the inﬂuence of time, such as the city’s past, present, and future states, current
trends, and historical layers. The primary aspect of this dimension is its consideration
of a city’s changes, continuity, and stability over time while respecting its history
and considering future needs to enable sustainable development. Within the temporal
dimension, the time cycle, continuity, and stability are vital components for plan-
ning and managing the progression of systems. Integrating green spaces, health and
education services, infrastructure, and communication networks into urban design
can improve the timing and interaction of activities. Therefore, SDG3 (Good Health
and Well-Being), SDG4 (Quality Education), SDG8 (Decent Work and Economic
Growth), SDG9 (Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure), and SDG13 (Climate
Action) are highly relevant SDGs. In addition, preserving a city’s historical and
cultural heritage is critical to maintaining its identity and continuity, directly related
to SDG11 (Sustainable Cities and Communities). Protecting underwater life, soils,
forests, and biodiversity is essential to ecosystem health and contributes to the contin-
uation of natural time cycles, consistent with SDG14 (Life below Water) and SDG15
(Life on Land). The matrix table indicates SDGs that are also indirectly related. This
dimension shows a high correlation with the SDGs, with a rate of 87.5 percent (score:
7), according to the data in the code system (Fig. 8).
Fig. 8 Relationship between the temporal dimension of urban design and the SDGs
The Role of Urban Design in Achieving the UN SDGs
343
5.7
Design Governance and the SDGs
TherelationshipbetweendesignmanagementandtheSDGsisexploredintheseventh
table of the evaluation matrix. This dimension deals with managing and monitoring
the decisions taken, which can be considered the next design stage. The main compo-
nents of this process are standards, responsibilities, regulations, and participatory
processes. Therefore, as a part of the design concern, design and planning process
policies have been recognized in regulations. The design of urban areas can be seen as
a nexus of regulations, urban planning, structural design, and environmental protec-
tion, and therefore has a high capacity to align with SDG11 (Sustainable Cities and
Communities) to promote sustainable development and enhance livability. Consid-
erations regarding accountability, cooperation, and partnership relate to SDG 17
(Partnership for the Goals). At the same time, aspects such as standards, inspections,
quality in infrastructure and industrial processes, and the increasing control and efﬁ-
ciency in consumption are linked to SDG 9 (Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure)
and SDG12 (Responsible Consumption and Production), enhancing the capacity to
innovate and adapt to technological advances. Furthermore, participatory involve-
ment and resource management are moderately high-interaction targets of SDG10
(Reduced Inequality) and SDG13 (Climate Action). The matrix below illustrates the
relationship of this dimension with other SDGs. According to the data in the code
system, this dimension is partially highly correlated with the SDGs and has a rate of
75% (Score: 6) (Fig. 9).
Fig. 9 Relationship between the design management dimension of urban design and the SDGs
344
¸S. Ho¸skara and Ö. S. Koç
5.8
Place Production and the SDGs
The following assessment matrix in Fig. 10 focused on the relationship between the
place production dimension and the SDGs. This dimension includes concerns about
how urban spaces are created and reconﬁgured, such as urban regeneration projects
and the remaking of public spaces. This dimension comprises four main elements:
place production, place identity, place management, and place value. The place
production dimension contributes to the empowerment of local cultural commu-
nities, the protection of cultural richness, and economic development. Therefore,
it has a strong relationship with the SDGs. Protecting local products and cultural
heritage and reﬂecting and strengthening local identity in the built environment
are directly related to SDG11 (Sustainable Cities and Communities) and SDG12
(Responsible Consumption and Production) as they promote sustainable production
and consumption, and the design and development of livable spaces. Following that,
SDG16 (Peace, Justice, and Strong Institutions) is related to the inclusion of public
spaces where strong institutions and local government can be involved in the design
processes and the production of design in response to the needs and demands of
local communities. It is important to note that these factors are highly inﬂuential in
achieving the SDG. In addition, it plays a crucial role in reducing income inequality
while promoting economic growth by designing spaces for small businesses and
initiatives that support local economies and development. Therefore, it also strongly
relates to SDG8 (Decent Work and Economic Growth). The assessment matrix table
in Fig. 10 also provides information on the SDGs to which they are indirectly related.
Based on the data in the code system, the last dimension is also partially highly related
to the SDGs, with 62.5% (Score: 5).
6
Findings and Discussions
Urban design is one of the main contributors to social behavior, the global economy,
and environmental management. Until recently, urban design applications have been
mainly focused on four dimensions of sustainable development, which are environ-
mental, social, economic, and cultural issues. However, as urban design ideas have
progressed, it has been determined that these four elements are insufﬁcient in the
spatial formation process. They should be supplemented with participation, manage-
ment support, and organizations at different scales. The ﬁndings of this study utilized
a multi-step research technique to examine the 2030 Agenda’s aims and impact on
urban design strategies. This research contributes to the literature on implementing
the 2030 New Urban Agenda. Also, it aimed to identify how the urban design
objectives interact with the SDGs.
Urban design can help achieve the SDGs by beneﬁting communities, individuals,
the economy, and the environment. The analysis shows that potential beneﬁts include
improved public health, increased social equity, increased land values, a more vibrant
The Role of Urban Design in Achieving the UN SDGs
345
Fig. 10 Relationship between the place production dimension of urban design and the SDGs
local economy, reduced environmental impact—vehicle emissions—and more envi-
ronmentally friendly usage of non-renewable resources. For this reason, urban design
has a decisive role in creating sustainable cities and increasing social awareness.
In analyzing the relationship between the dimensions of urban design and the
SDGs using the code system, we consider the number of matched codes. This
matching supports the potential of urban design as a tool for achieving SDGs,
as it reveals the perception and development process of urban design over time.
Initially discussed as a supportive discipline at the interface of architecture and plan-
ning, the ever-evolving ideology of urban design updates itself by considering the
changing characteristics of today’s world, including shifting boundaries, collabora-
tion, speed of transfer, environmental concerns, and consumer behavior, where many
concerns are discussed beyond the scope of being an interface discipline. Although
the concept was initially introduced with six dimensions (morphological, percep-
tual, social, visual, functional, and time-based), which mainly focused on physical
organization, order, social interaction, and community production through design
methods and space production, the last two dimensions, design management, and
space production were developed as ﬂexible spatial organizations and arrangements
that can be adapted to urban crises and challenges, and as part of management
collaboration and control processes. (Carmona, 2023) The concept also considers
the uniqueness and aesthetics of the city, functionality, and the past, present, and
future layers, as well as providing a partial reﬂection of the dynamic structure of
cities. Due to its diverse and dynamic nature, urban design was found to respond
directly or indirectly to many SDGs. These relationships are presented in detail in
346
¸S. Ho¸skara and Ö. S. Koç
Table 2 through code matching, with red denoting the social impact, blue signi-
fying the economic impact, and green representing the environmental impact, as has
already been mentioned in the methodology section. Yellow on the matrix represents
the total and direct relationship of SDG11 to all dimensions.
The data shows that SDG11 (Sustainable Cities and Communities) has a 100%
correlation with urban design, followed by SDG3 (Good Health and Well Being) with
77.7%, SDG16 (Peace, Justice, and Strong Institutions) with 74%, SDG10 (Reduced
Inequality) with 72.2%, SDG8 (Decent Work and Economic Growth) with 70.3%,
and SDG9 (Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure) with 70.3%. On the other hand,
SDG14 (Life below Water) has the lowest correlation with 12.9%, followed by SDG2
Table 2 Level of code-matching of the relationship between all urban design dimensions and the
SDGs
The Role of Urban Design in Achieving the UN SDGs
347
Fig. 11 Overall percentages of the relationship of SDGs to urban design
Fig. 12 Overall percentages of the relationship of urban design dimensions to SDGs
(Zero Hunger) with 25.9%, and SDG1 (No Poverty) with 31.4%. These results are
presented in Fig. 11.
Furthermore, upon analyzing the individual relationship between urban design
dimensions (Fig. 12), it becomes apparent that the social and temporal dimension
has the highest rate of concern, 87.5%, followed by design governance, 75%, and
place production and morphological dimensions, 62.5%. However, compared to the
other dimensions, the visual dimension showed a lower response rate of 37.5% in
both practical and theoretical performance.
7
Conclusion
As stated in the introduction, the existing body of research provides a foundation for
examining the role of the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs in guiding cities’ development
processes as tools for sustainability assessment. However, there remains a signiﬁcant
gap in understanding how urban design principles interact with the SDGs and their
targets, a crucial aspect for fostering sustainable urban development and shaping
the future of cities. Thus, this research endeavored to address the following inquiry
through an extensive literature review of urban design theories, particularly focusing
on dimensions of urban design deﬁned by Carmona and Wunderlich (2013): How
can urban design contribute to achieving SDGs?
348
¸S. Ho¸skara and Ö. S. Koç
Based on grounded theory, following the ﬁndings of this theoretical, documentary,
and qualitative research, it can be argued that to achieve SDGs, urban design theories
and practices must consider the effects of changing needs and social structures and
be shaped by the following factors:
1. A universal approach for more systematic knowledge development and applica-
tion,
2. Identiﬁcation of limits that cause a gap between urban expectations and actual
practice,
3. Providing strategic focal points to address this knowledge gap.
These three factors reveal that the differentiation between urban design practice
and theory should be reduced, and a more comprehensive and unifying understanding
introduced. Finally, the most pressing need is developing integrated strategies at
broader urban scales. Within any urban design scheme, the knowledge framework
should adopt a systems perspective, including the SDGs and their targets, leaving no
one and no place behind.
Keeping these main lessons of the paper in mind, one should remember that this
research focused on the relationship between urban design (and its dimensions) and
the SDGs within its limitations. However, focusing solely on urban design theories
may overlook valuable insights from other disciplines, such as architecture, plan-
ning, sociology, economics, and environmental science, which also play a role in
achieving SDGs through urban development. Besides, urban development is a multi-
faceted process inﬂuenced by various factors beyond urban design, such as gover-
nance structures, economic policies, and social dynamics. It may be argued that
the research may struggle to capture these interactions’ complexities adequately.
Therefore, based on the research ﬁndings presented in this paper, the authors suggest
further research to explore the relationship and contribution of diverse ﬁelds, such
as sociology, economics, environmental science, policy studies, etc., to SDGs. This
would make it possible to identify common themes, overlaps, and areas of diver-
gence across disciplines to develop a holistic understanding of how urban design
contributes to achieving SDGs. Besides, engaging experts from diverse disciplines
in the research process can enrich an understanding of how various disciplines
contribute to achieving SDGs through urban development. Their diverse perspec-
tives and expertise can offer valuable insights and ensure the new research addresses
multidimensional aspects of sustainable urban development and further supports
achieving SDGs.
The Role of Urban Design in Achieving the UN SDGs
349
Appendix 1:
Resources for Assessing Urban Design Dimensions
Main
resource
Resource
Authors
Year
Document
types
Urban
design
dimensions
Public Places, Urban Spaces:
The Dimensions of Urban
Design
Matthew Carmona, Tim
Heath, Taner Oc, and Steve
Tiesdell
2003;
2021
Book
Theoretical
dimensions
Resource
Authors
Year
Document
types
Morphological
dimension
The Image of the City
Kevin Lynch
1960
Book
Responsive Environments: A
Manual for Designers
Ian Bentley, Alan
Alcock, Sue Murrain,
Paul McGlynn, and
Graham Smith
1985
Book
Urban Design: The
Composition of Complexity
Ron Kasprisin
2011
Book
Perceptual
dimension
Cities for People
Jan Gehl
2010
Book
Urban Design Compendium
English Partnerships
and the Housing
Corporation
2000
Report
Social
dimension
Human Aspect of Urban Form
Towards a Man–Environment
Approach to Urban Form and
Design
Amos Rapoport
1977
Book
The Death and Life of Great
American Cities
Jane Jacobs
1961
Book
The Social Logic of Space
Bill Hillier and
Julienne Hanson
1984
Book
The Just City
Susan S. Fainstein
2010
Book
Visual
dimension
Responsive Environments: A
Manual for Designers
Ian Bentley, Alan
Alcock, Sue Murrain,
Paul McGlynn, and
Graham Smith
1985
Book
Urban Design as Public
Policy: Evaluating the Design
Dimension of Vancouver’s
Planning System
Jonathan Barnett
1974
Article
functional
dimension
Urban Design Compendium
English Partnerships
and the Housing
Corporation
2000
Report
(continued)
350
¸S. Ho¸skara and Ö. S. Koç
(continued)
Theoretical
dimensions
Resource
Authors
Year
Document
types
The Urban Design Process
Geoffrey Broadbent
1990
Book
Chapter
Design
governance
Responsive Environments: A
Manual for Designers
Ian Bentley, Alan
Alcock, Sue Murrain,
Paul McGlynn, and
Graham Smith
1985
Book
Design Governance: The
Importance of a
Multidisciplinary and
Integrated Approach
Matthew Carmona
2016
Article
Place
production
The Production of Space
Henri Lefebvre
1991
Book
Resources for Assessing Sustainable Development Goals
in an Urban Context
Practical
applications
Resource
Authors
Year
Document
types
Healthy Cities: The Theory, Policy,
and Practice of Value-Based
Urban Planning
Evelyne de Leeuw,
Jean Simos
2017
Book
Designing Healthy Communities
Richard J. Jackson
2011
Book
Meeting Development Goals in
Small Urban Centres: Water and
Sanitation in the Worlds Cities
2006
UN-Habitat
2012
Book
Water and sanitation in the world’s
cities: Local action for global
goals
United Nations
Human Settlements
Programme
2003
Report/
Book
The Future of Urban Mobility
2.0
Arthur D. Little and
the UITP
2014
Report
The Right To The City
And Cities For All
Habitat III
2016
Report
Resilient Cities: Overcoming
Fossil Fuel Dependence
Peter Newman,
Timothy Beatley,
and Heather Boyer
2009
Book
Global Report on Human
Settlements: Planning Sustainable
Cities
United Nations
Human Settlements
Programme
2009
Report
(continued)
The Role of Urban Design in Achieving the UN SDGs
351
(continued)
Practical
applications
Resource
Authors
Year
Document
types
Sustainable Urban Design: An
Environmental Approach
Adam Ritchie and
Randall Thomas
2013
Book
Urban Design and the Bottom
Line: Optimizing the Return on
Perception
Dennis Jerke et al
2008
Book
Climate Change and Cities: First
Assessment Report of the Urban
Climate Change Research Network
Cynthia
Rosenzweig et al
2011
Book
Urban Biodiversity and Design
Norbert Müller,
Peter Werner, and
John G. Kelcey
2010
Book
State Of The World’s Cities 2012/
2013
UN-Habitat
2012
Report
The Architecture of Community
Leon Krier
2009
Book
Designing Sustainable Cities in
the Developing World
Roger Zetter,
Georgina Butina
Watson
2016
Book
Sustainable Urbanism: Urban
Design With Nature
Douglas Farr
2011
Book
AN ARCHITECTURE GUIDE
to the UN 17 Sustainable
Development Goals
UIA
2018/
20
Report
Appendix 2:
Coding of SDGs and their Descriptions
SDGs
Codes
SDG1
A1
Poverty, Social Protection, Inequality, Vulnerable Groups
SDG2
A2
Food Security, Agriculture, Nutrition, Sustainable Farming, Resilient Crop
Production
SDG3
A3
Health, Well-being, Disease Prevention, Universal Health Coverage, Maternal
and Child Health
SDG4
A4
Education, Skills, Literacy, Inclusion, Access to Education, Quality Education,
Lifelong Learning
SDG5
A5
Gender Equality, Empowerment, Discrimination Prevention, Women’s Rights
SDG6
A6
Water, Sanitation, Hygiene, Water Management, Clean Water Access, Water
Quality
SDG7
A7
Energy, Electricity, Renewables, Access, Clean Energy, Energy Efﬁciency
(continued)
352
¸S. Ho¸skara and Ö. S. Koç
(continued)
SDGs
Codes
SDG8
A8
Economic Growth, Job Creation, Innovation, Sustainable Production, Decent
Work
SDG9
A9
Infrastructure, Industry, Innovation, Technology, Digitalization, Connectivity
SDG10
A10
Inequality, Inclusion, Discrimination, Social Protection, Equity
SDG11
A11
Sustainable Cities, Resilient Infrastructure, Heritage Protection, Urban
Planning
SDG12
A12
Sustainable Consumption, Resource Efﬁciency, Waste Management, Circular
Economy
SDG13
A13
Climate Change, Resilience, Mitigation, Adaptation, Carbon Emissions,
Renewable Energy
SDG14
A14
Ocean Protection, Marine Life Conservation, Sustainable Fisheries, Marine
Pollution
SDG15
A15
Ecosystems, Biodiversity, Forests, Conservation, Land Degradation, Wildlife
SDG16
A16
Peace, Justice, Strong Institutions, Rule of Law, Human Rights, Corruption,
Violence Prevention
SDG17
A17
Partnerships, Finance, Technology Transfer, Trade, Capacity Building, Global
Cooperation, Data and Monitoring
SDGs & Codes
Descriptions
Poverty
A 1
Addresses poverty eradication and social protection policies
Social protection
A1
Emphasizes social safety nets and support for vulnerable groups
Inequality
A1, 10
Focuses on reducing inequalities within and among countries
Vulnerable groups
A 1, 2
Highlights support for vulnerable populations in the context of
various goals
Food security
A 2
Focuses on ensuring access to nutritious food for all
Agriculture
A 2
Addresses sustainable agriculture and food production systems
Nutrition
A 2
Emphasizes adequate nutrition and healthy diets
Sustainable
farming
A 2
Promotes environmentally friendly farming practices
Resilient crop
production
A 2
Highlights strategies for resilient crop production
Health
A 3
Addresses health-related targets, including disease prevention
and universal health coverage
Well-being
A 3
Focuses on overall well-being and quality of life
Disease prevention A 3
Emphasizes measures to prevent diseases
Universal health
coverage
A 3
Highlights the importance of accessible and affordable
healthcare for all
Maternal and child
health
A 3
Focuses on improving maternal and child health outcomes
Education
A 4
Emphasizes inclusive and quality education for all
Skills
A 4
Focuses on developing skills and competencies
Literacy
A 4
Highlights literacy and educational attainment
(continued)
The Role of Urban Design in Achieving the UN SDGs
353
(continued)
SDGs & Codes
Descriptions
Inclusion
A 4, 10
Addresses inclusive education and reducing disparities in access
Access to
education
A 4
Focuses on ensuring access to education for all
Quality education
A 4
Emphasizes the importance of quality learning environments
Lifelong learning
A 4
Promotes continuous learning throughout life
Gender equality
A 5
Focuses on achieving gender equality and empowering women
and girls
Empowerment
A 5
Highlights empowerment of women and girls
Discrimination
prevention
A 5
Emphasizes measures to prevent discrimination based on gender
Women’s rights
A 5
Promotes the protection and advancement of women’s rights
Water
A 6
Addresses water-related targets, including clean water access and
management
Sanitation
A 6
Focuses on improving sanitation and hygiene practices
Hygiene
A 6
Emphasizes personal and public hygiene practices
Water
management
A 6
Highlights sustainable water management approaches
Clean water access A 6
Focuses on ensuring access to clean and safe drinking water
Water quality
A 6
Emphasizes the importance of water quality and pollution control
Energy
A 7
Addresses energy-related targets, including access to clean and
affordable energy
Electricity
A 7
Focuses on improving access to electricity
Renewables
A 7
Promotes renewable energy sources and technologies
Clean energy
A 7
Emphasizes the transition to clean and sustainable energy
solutions
Energy efﬁciency
A 7
Promotes energy efﬁciency and conservation measures
Economic growth
A 8
Focuses on inclusive and sustainable economic growth
Job creation
A 8
Emphasizes the creation of decent work and employment
opportunities
Innovation
A 8
Highlights the role of innovation in fostering economic
development
Sustainable
production
A 8
Promotes sustainable production and consumption patterns
Decent work
A 8
Focuses on promoting decent and productive employment
Infrastructure
A 9
Addresses infrastructure development and connectivity
Industry
A 9
Focuses on fostering inclusive and sustainable industrialization
Technology
A 9
Highlights the importance of technology and digitalization
Digitalization
A 9
Emphasizes digital transformation and connectivity
Connectivity
A 9
Promotes improved connectivity and access to technology
Inclusion
A 10
Focuses on reducing inequality within and among countries
(continued)
354
¸S. Ho¸skara and Ö. S. Koç
(continued)
SDGs & Codes
Descriptions
Discrimination
A 10
Addresses discrimination and exclusionary practices
Social protection
A 10
Emphasizes social safety nets and support for vulnerable groups
Equity
A 10
Promotes equity and equality in access to resources and
opportunities
Sustainable cities
A 11
Focuses on sustainable urban development and resilient
infrastructure
Resilient
infrastructure
A 11
Highlights the importance of resilient infrastructure in cities
Heritage
protection
A 11
Addresses the protection of cultural and natural heritage
Urban planning
A 11
Promotes inclusive and sustainable urban planning
Sustainable
consumption
A 12
Focuses on promoting sustainable consumption patterns
Resource
efﬁciency
A 12
Emphasizes efﬁcient use of resources to minimize environmental
impact
Waste
management
A 12
Addresses waste reduction, recycling, and proper disposal
Circular economy
A 12
Promotes circular economic models that minimize waste and
maximize resource use efﬁciency
Climate change
A 13
Focuses on climate change mitigation and adaptation strategies
Resilience
A 13
Highlights building resilience to climate-related impacts
Mitigation
A 13
Addresses measures to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions
Adaptation
A 13
Emphasizes adaptation to climate change impacts
Carbon emissions
A 13
Focuses on reducing carbon emissions and promoting
low-carbon technologies
Renewable energy
A 13
Promotes the use of renewable energy sources
Ocean protection
A 14
Focuses on conserving and sustainably using ocean resources
Marine life
conservation
A 14
Emphasizes conservation of marine biodiversity and ecosystems
Sustainable
ﬁsheries
A 14
Promotes sustainable management of ﬁsheries
Marine pollution
A 14
Addresses prevention and reduction of marine pollution
Ecosystems
A 15
Focuses on conservation and restoration of terrestrial and marine
ecosystems
Biodiversity
A 15
Emphasizes biodiversity conservation and protection
Forests
A 15
Addresses sustainable management and conservation of forests
Conservation
A 15
Promotes conservation of natural habitats and ecosystems
Land degradation
A 15
Emphasizes combating land degradation and restoring degraded
lands
Wildlife
A 15
Addresses protection and conservation of wildlife species
(continued)
The Role of Urban Design in Achieving the UN SDGs
355
(continued)
SDGs & Codes
Descriptions
Peace
A 16
Focuses on promoting peace, justice, and strong institutions
Justice
A 16
Emphasizes access to justice and rule of law
Strong institutions
A 16
Highlights the importance of strong, accountable institutions
Rule of law
A 16
Promotes adherence to the rule of law and human rights
Human rights
A 16
Emphasizes protection and promotion of human rights
Corruption
A 16
Addresses efforts to combat corruption and bribery
Violence
prevention
A 16
Focuses on preventing all forms of violence and related death
rates
Partnerships
A 17
Promotes global partnerships for sustainable development
Finance
A 17
Addresses ﬁnancial resources mobilization for development
Technology
transfer
A 17
Emphasizes technology transfer to developing countries
Trade
A 17
Focuses on promoting international trade for sustainable
development
Capacity building
A 17
Highlights capacity-building efforts in developing countries
Global cooperation A 17
Promotes global cooperation and collaboration to achieve the
SDGs
Data and
monitoring
A 17
Emphasizes the importance of reliable data and monitoring for
progress tracking
References
Bai X, Surveyer A, Elmqvist T, Gatzweiler FW, Güneralp B, Parnell S, Webb R et al (2016) Deﬁning
and advancing a systems approach for sustainable cities. Curr Opin Environ Sustain 23:69–78
Caiado RGG, Leal Filho W, Quelhas OLG, de Mattos Nascimento DL, Ávila LV (2018) A literature-
based review on potentials and constraints in the implementation of the sustainable development
goals. J Clean Prod 198:1276–1288
Carmona M, Tiesdell S, Oc T, Heath T (2003) Public places urban spaces, Great Britain
Carmona M (2021) Public places urban spaces: the dimensions of urban design. Routledge
Carmona M, Wunderlich F (2013) Capital spaces: the multiple complex public spaces of a global
city. Routledge
Cullen G (1961) Townscape. The Architectural Press.
Elshater A (2012) New urbanism principles versus urban design dimensions towards behavior
performance efﬁciency in Egyptian neighbourhood unit. Procedia Soc Behav Sci 68:826–843
Jayasuriya L (2001) Rethinking social development: towards an equitable future for Sri Lanka∥.
South Asian Econ J 2(1):105–121
Jones D, Truell R (2012) The global agenda for social work and social development: extending the
inﬂuence of social work. Int Soc Work 55(4):454–472
Kroll C, Warchold A, Pradhan P (2019) Sustainable development goals (SDGs): are we successful
in turning trade-offs into synergies? Palgrave Commun 5(1):1–11
Kumar S, Kumar N, Vivekadhish S (2016) Millennium development goals (MDGs) to sustain-
able development goals (SDGs): addressing unﬁnished agenda and strengthening sustainable
356
¸S. Ho¸skara and Ö. S. Koç
development and partnership. Indian J Community Med: off Publ Indian Assoc Prev Soc Med
41(1):1
KumiE,ArhinAA,YeboahT(2014)Canpost-2015sustainabledevelopmentgoalssurviveneoliber-
alism? a critical examination of the sustainable development–neoliberalism nexus in developing
countries. Environ Dev Sustain 16:539–554
Lynch K (1960) The image of the environment. Image City 11:1–13
Sachs JD (2012) From millennium development goals to sustainable development goals. Lancet
379(9832):2206–2211
Stafford-Smith M, Griggs D, Gaffney O, Ullah F, Reyers B, Kanie N, O’Connell D (2017)
Integration: the key to implementing the sustainable development goals. Sustain Sci 12:911–919
WCED(1987)Ourcommonfuture.In:Worldcommissiononenvironmentanddevelopment.Oxford
University Press, Oxford
Yeang LD (2000) Urban design compendium. English Partnerships/Housing Corporation, London
Fostering Sustainability Through
Research and Education? The
Transformative Role of Switzerland’s
Centre for Development
and Environment (CDE)
Christoph Bader, Sabin Bieri, Lilian Trechsel, and Anu Lannen
Abstract As environmental challenges and social inequalities continue to mount,
the current decade has acquired unprecedented importance. The urgency of
addressing unsustainable development and achieving the sustainable development
goals (SDG) is greater than ever. This chapter examines the contributions of Switzer-
land’s Centre for Development and Environment (CDE) towards realizing a sustain-
able world, highlighting selected research and educational projects from CDE’s
past and current initiatives. Emphasizing CDE’s commitment to actionable knowl-
edge, inclusiveness, and systems thinking—as expressed in its theory of change—the
chapter shows how transformative science is put to work. This includes producing
knowledge that not only contributes to global sustainability debates, but also beneﬁts
speciﬁc marginalized communities and ecosystems on the ground. Over the years,
CDE has learned that its sustainability contributions are most effective when rooted in
speciﬁc contexts and carried out with trusted local partners. Its recommendations for
a future research agenda include continuing reﬁnement of methodologies to support
transdisciplinarity and concerted expansion of efforts to decolonize academia.
Keywords Sustainable development · Transformation · Transdisciplinary
1
Introduction
In a world that confronts intensifying environmental challenges and persistent social
inequalities, the present decade has assumed unparalleled signiﬁcance. The urgency
of tackling unsustainable development and achieving the sustainable development
goals (SDGs) is greater than ever. Higher education institutions have a particular
responsibility to contribute to transformation pathways for global sustainability.
C. Bader (B) · S. Bieri · L. Trechsel · A. Lannen
Centre for Development and Environment (CDE), University of Bern, Mittelstrasse 43,
Bern 3012, Switzerland
e-mail: christoph.bader@unibe.ch
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_21
357
358
C. Bader et al.
Through their research and education activities, higher education institutions are
in a privileged, yet critical position to help bring about the sustainability transfor-
mations the world so desperately needs. In the following, we explore the transfor-
mative approach of Switzerland’s Centre for Development and Environment (CDE).
Begun as a research group in 1988, CDE set out on a journey to make meaningful
contributions to sustainable development by weaving together scientiﬁc rigour and
real-world engagement. The integration of sustainable development at the Univer-
sity of Bern was eventually afforded greater political anchoring by legislation passed
in 1996 (Gesetz über die Universität (UniG) 1996). Then, in 2009, CDE experi-
enced a renaissance when it was made an ofﬁcial research centre under the Univer-
sity of Bern’s banner. Its rising prominence was shaped by the leadership role it
assumed in the National Centre of Competence in Research (NCCR) North–South,
a sweeping international research programme focused on sustainable development,
originally launched in 2001. CDE’s emergence on a wider stage aligned perfectly
with the University of Bern’s strategic focus on “mastering global change” and its
commitment to furthering sustainable development. Today, CDE is a cross-faculty
research centre encompassing around 90 specialists from 25 disciplines working in
collaboration with numerous partners around the globe (www.cde.unibe.ch).
Now empowered as a university-wide entity, CDE oversees all University of Bern
research, teaching, knowledge exchange, and service capacities concerning sustain-
able development and environmental issues. Its original focus on natural resources
management and sustainable regional development in the “global South” has grown
signiﬁcantly, inparticular withaviewtotransformingpatterns andpolicies inwealthy
countries, like Switzerland, that hinder sustainable development elsewhere. From
the start, however, CDE has striven to unite scientiﬁc inquiry with hands-on use
and policy engagement. Over time, the centre’s multilevel research–practice–policy
ambitions have evolved into a distinct inter- and transdisciplinary approach (Hurni
and Wiesmann 2014) that informs all of its efforts towards sustainability transforma-
tions. Along the way, CDE has learned that its contributions to global discourses on
development, the environment, and sustainability are most effective when grounded
in speciﬁc contexts and carried out in collaboration with trusted local partners. Over
the course of three decades, the centre has established partnerships in East Africa,
the Horn of Africa, Central and Southeast Asia, and South America, most of which
endure to the present day.
In this chapter, the authors outline CDE’s theory of change, illustrate it with case
examples, and derive corresponding insights for a transformative research agenda
towards global sustainability.
2
CDE’s Theory of Change and Pathways to Impact
At the heart of CDE’s mission to enable transformations towards sustainability lies
a robust theory of change (Oberlack et al. 2019), created and consolidated in 2021
through a concerted team effort. It is illustrated below.
Fostering Sustainability Through Research and Education? The …
359
CDE is an academic institution dedicated to cutting-edge research across the spec-
trum of sustainability science (CDE 2021). Through the centre’s diverse educa-
tional programmes, we foster sustainability skills at the bachelor’s, master’s, and
doctoral level. CDE cultivates long-term international partnerships with institutions
that anchor its research in concrete settings around the world. Operating across disci-
plines and beyond is fundamental to the centre’s approach, making it possible to
harness both academic and non-academic knowledge for sustainable solutions. This
integration is facilitated through practical and inclusive exchange formats, character-
ized by transdisciplinarity and a commitment to contextual relevance and grounded
sensitivity.
CDE puts its own theory of change to work within four distinct pathways to
impact. They are as follows.
Pathway 1: Scientiﬁcally sound knowledge generation. CDE is committed to
pioneering advanced scientiﬁc analyses, generating key insights across the expan-
sive landscape of sustainability science. The centre’s research produces robust
evidence characterized by a systems perspective, providing a basis for informed
decision-making and actions aimed at addressing pressing sustainability challenges.
360
C. Bader et al.
Pathway2:Nurturingsustainabilitycompetences.Througheducationalprogrammes.
Encompassing graduate and post-graduate studies as well specialized advanced
study programmes, the centre’s educational initiatives equip younger generations
with the skills and awareness essential for sustainable development. By empowering
future leaders with transformative literacy and practical expertise, the centre actively
contributes to the foundations of a sustainable world.
Pathway 3: Cultivating long-term international partnerships. CDE’s enduring
commitment to international partner networks underscores its dedication to contex-
tual relevance and global collaboration. By fostering sustained relationships, CDE
ensures ownership of transformative initiatives in concrete contexts and the mean-
ingful applicability of its research in diverse regional settings, bolstering its collective
efforts towards sustainable change.
Fostering Sustainability Through Research and Education? The …
361
Pathway 4: Tailored exchange for transdisciplinary learning. CDE champions a
dynamic exchange of knowledge through customized, inclusive learning formats that
bridge academia and hands-on practice. The synergy of academic and non-academic
perspectives, facilitated by transdisciplinarity research methods and formats, fuels
the co-creation of solutions on behalf of a more sustainable, inclusive future.
In the following section, individual case examples are presented that illustrate
the centre’s work within the four pathways to impact. These real-world examples
demonstrate how CDE’s theory of change translates into concrete transformations
across scientiﬁc knowledge, education, international partnerships, and the dynamic
exchange of knowledge.
3
Illustrations of Impact Pathways: Highlighting
Real-World Change
Scientiﬁcally Sound Knowledge Generation: Research for Sustainable Agricul-
tural Trade
Maintaining high academic standards while pursuing systems, target, and transfor-
mation knowledge, CDE is committed to engaged and transformative science (CDE
2017, 2021). The centre’s research analyses complex global change processes and
their consequences. It explores interactions between land use and ecosystems; overall
framework conditions (e.g. policies, regulations, governance structures); and the
standards of living, lifestyles, and well-being of diverse populations.
As one example among many, the recent project “Fostering Sustainable Food
Systems through Trade Relations” demonstrates how the centre’s research provides
useful knowledge for informed decision-making at various policy levels. Similar
to other CDE projects, it is characterized by proposing concrete action—in this
case introducing a zero draft for a new Swiss agricultural trade law—on behalf of
a pressing sustainability challenge. The project highlights how governments can
play a pivotal role in fostering diversiﬁed and sustainable food systems through
trade relations. It shows how authorities can distinguish between sustainably and
less sustainably produced food without compromising fundamental principles of the
362
C. Bader et al.
global trade framework, particularly the principle of non-discrimination. This, in
turn, can pave the way for more nuanced and structured trade regimes that champion
diverse food systems.
Article 104a lit. d of the Swiss Federal Constitution mandates the Confederation
to establish the groundwork for “cross-border trade relations that contribute to the
sustainable development of the agriculture and food sector.” To date, the constitu-
tional provision remains unfulﬁlled and its execution appears far from straightfor-
ward. The complexity arises, in part, due to critical narratives that have cast agricul-
tural trade as intrinsically unsustainable. However, the crux of sustainability lies in a
crucial question: How can the public sector bolster the market presence of sustainably
produced goods while curbing access to unsustainable products via product differ-
entiation? And how can this be done without harming the most vulnerable actors in
the supply chain, in particular small-scale agricultural producers in countries of the
global South?
Drawing on insights from a CDE study comparing European Free Trade Associa-
tion (EFTA) negotiations with Mercosur and the EFTA–Indonesia agreement, several
pivotal principles emerge (Bonanomi and Tribaldos 2020). Central to this process
is the ability of the state to distinguish between sustainable and unsustainable food
production—a task made easier when internationally accepted standards serve as
reference points. While existing World Trade Organization (WTO) rules seemingly
restrict states from discerning sustainable from non-sustainable products in trade and
commercial contexts, further examination reveals room for manoeuvre. Challenging
widely held assumptions, CDE research highlights the potential for states to navigate
within WTO restrictions while fostering sustainability (Musselli et al. 2022a, b).
Other project-related CDE research on the trade and marketing of “sustainable”
ﬁsh reveals the risks of relying on labels and certiﬁcation processes to ensure
sustainability (Baumgartner and Bonanomi 2021). Similarly, a CDE study exam-
ining Swiss soy imports from Brazil ﬁnds shortcomings in the prevalent GMO-free
and certiﬁed soy model (Frey et al. 2022). Accordingly, the research team argues that
private initiatives must be complemented by public-sector efforts to ensure quality
through regulations and incentives. However, states must proceed with care, striving
to balance fundamental equity principles and WTO requirements. This means they
must create incentives and regulate trade in a way that enables context-sensitive
solutions and provides market access to low-income partners and small producers in
other countries.
Since the project was embedded in the “Sustainable Economy” research
programme of the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF), the team was required
to present their ﬁndings in a way that is easily accessible and understood by both the
Swiss government and policymakers in general. For this reason, the team chose to
render their synthesis very concretely in a hypothetical legislative act on sustainable
agricultural trade.
Fostering Sustainability Through Research and Education? The …
363
Nurturing Sustainability Competences: Education that Bridges Theory and
Practice
As a university centre that strives to spearhead engaged and transformative science
and usher in sustainable futures, CDE’s most immediate contribution and effec-
tive lever to these ends is its work in educating and collaborating with students.
It can hardly be overstated how much the leadership and capacity of younger
generations is needed to enable transformations towards sustainable development.
CDE’s educational programmes are designed to build corresponding competences
in students.
A key challenge lies in the fact that necessary competences for the twenty-ﬁrst
century are difﬁcult to predict. What appears most needed are “transition managers”
or “change agents”, a concept that CDE’s new master’s programme seeks to develop
further. The curriculum is designed to instil in students a deep understanding of
sustainability challenges and the tools needed to address them at various scales.
CDE and partners from the educational unit at the University of Bern have designed
a competence model for university study programmes that builds on academic
knowledge, professional skills, and critical awareness (Barth and Rieckmann 2016;
Brundiersetal.2021;HammerandLewis2023;Herwegetal.2021;Wieketal.2011).
Students are taught how to develop inter- and transdisciplinary problem framings as
well as how to initiate, manage, and evaluate concrete transformation processes at
different societal levels. In this way, CDE’s educational initiatives go far beyond
development of theoretical knowledge. The centre emphasizes the practical appli-
cation of sustainability principles, encouraging students to translate their learnings
into tangible actions. Whether through ﬁeldwork, case studies, or hands-on projects,
CDE students help to bridge the gap between theory and real-world impact (e.g.
Trechsel et al. 2023).
By nurturing sustainability competences in students, the centre actively
contributes to the foundations of a more sustainable world. Graduates emerge not
just as skilled professionals, but as advocates and agents for positive change—espe-
cially via global partnerships and collaboration. Through CDE’s engagement in the
doctoral-level International Graduate School (IGS) North–South programme, the
centre seeks to promote equitable, partnership-based research and to foster the devel-
opment of individual and institutional capacities. Doctoral candidates are encouraged
to address sustainability challenges in the context of international partnerships that
enable them to build their own scientiﬁc networks (Trechsel et al. 2020). In addition
to online and on-site doctoral training courses, the core of the IGS North–South is
a two-week international learning event (summer school) designed to train doctoral
candidates and future trainers—that is, junior and senior lecturers unfamiliar or inex-
perienced with the training approach needed for research for sustainable develop-
ment. In this setting, international students are challenged to go beyond traditional
classroom experiences and to develop the skills, methods, and attitudes required to
address global challenges in an interdisciplinary, team-oriented manner. Apart from
invaluable networks that open up for both students from the global South and the
364
C. Bader et al.
global North, the sharing of knowledge with diverse stakeholders is highly illumi-
nating for the academic participants—in particular, they realize the potentials and
limits of their function as scientists in addressing societal problems and exploring
sustainability pathways (Trechsel et al. 2021). Last but not least, the international
beyond-classroomexperienceoffersparticipantsanimmersionexperienceinaninter-
cultural learning environment as well as hands-on exploration of power structures
along the lines of gender, race, class, and social origin.
The experience of one graduate illustrates the potential of CDE’s international
exchange architecture. The graduate’s name has been changed to protect her privacy.
Martine Nzabonimpa joined CDE via a research project on the commercialization
of agriculture, co-funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation and the Swiss
Agency for Development and Cooperation. As a doctoral student in this international
project, examining the livelihood effects of export agriculture in four countries, she
engaged in the peer network with the rest of the doctoral students—ﬁrst through the
project and later through the IGS North–South network. She developed her proﬁle
by acquiring skills through targeted IGS North–South courses, but also through
direct exchanges with researchers in Switzerland. She demonstrated her intellectual
strength and exceptional commitment in various exchange semesters in Switzerland.
She used these precious opportunities to advance her scientiﬁc work in an environ-
ment where she was less torn between her roles as a doctoral student, a member
of a research team at an NGO, and a mother. Through the international exposure
with students from around the globe, she gained intercultural competences. She also
realized how to negotiate her own interests in her professional environment at home—
scientiﬁc as well as personal—with her superiors (mostly men). Today, she is one
of very few women holding a PhD in her country—at the time of her defence, the
number of PhD holders in Rwanda was under 1,000, with only a handful women
among them. She now has an inﬂuential position in the government, where she is
instrumental in shaping the country’s agricultural strategy. Martine’s story demon-
strates the transformative effect of the partnership-driven concept of the graduate
school, highlighting the type of impact that is not often showcased in higher education
debates or in the framework of international development.
Cultivating Long-Term International Partnerships: Seeds Planted in Africa
Bear Global Fruit
Since its 1980s-era inception as a research group, CDE has held that it is not
possible—or desirable—to conduct meaningful sustainability research in the global
South without partners in and from the regions under study. Over the decades, CDE
has proactively avoided the traps of “helicopter research” or “parachute science”
(Adame 2021), whereby academics from wealthy Northern countries brieﬂy visit
low-income countries to gather data—for example, on neglected tropical diseases—
only to return home to publish results and advance their own careers. Instead, working
shoulder-to-shoulder with local scientists and communities in countries of Africa,
South America, Asia, and beyond, CDE’s founding researchers recognized early
on that “solutions” to development challenges—like poverty, water scarcity, or land
degradation—would only succeed if they were co-created with affected stakeholders
Fostering Sustainability Through Research and Education? The …
365
and led to anchoring of knowledge and expertise in situ. Partnership was seen not
only as the right thing to do from a normative perspective, but also practically and in
the sense of mutual self-interest—interest in learning from one another as peers and
in tackling global threats like climate change (Hurni and Wiesmann 2014). Together
withtheirinternationalpartners,CDEresearcherswerealsoinstrumentalindesigning
a conceptual framework for partnership research between the global North and the
global South. The resulting “KFPE principles” are now widely regarded as gold-
standard guidelines for building and working in global partnerships (KFPE https://
kfpe.scnat.ch/en/11_principles_7_questions).
TheﬁrstseedsofCDE’spartnership-basedresearchapproachweresownineastern
Africa in the 1980s, above all in hands-on projects aimed at helping ensure the liveli-
hoods of smallholder farmers and other land users living in harsh, unpredictable,
and changing climatic conditions. In Kenya, for example, CDE researchers began
working with local experts in the Mount Kenya region, exploring ways of enabling
local populations to share the ﬁnite water resources that ﬂow down the mountain in
the rainy season (CDE 2015). In addition to enabling Swiss and African colleagues
to gain expertise and earn advanced degrees side by side, this research gradually
supported the co-creation of locally embedded Water User Associations (WUAs)
whose members share river water by mutual agreement based on scientiﬁc moni-
toring data. Meanwhile, in Ethiopia, initial cooperative research focused on ﬁnding
practical solutions to soil erosion in the Ethiopian Highlands, helping to preserve
or restore fertile croplands that feed millions. Among other things, this research led
to collaborative reﬁnement of techniques of soil and water conservation across the
region—with global implications. For example, joint advances were made in the use
and understanding of age-old practices like cropland terracing, which were revealed
to have the added long-term beneﬁt of capturing and storing climate-warming CO2
in the fertile humus layer of rejuvenated soils (Amare et al. 2013).
Decisively, these partnership-based research efforts in the global South were not
limited to short ﬁeld visits and isolated projects, but rather continued for decades
and led to cultivation of mutually beneﬁcial relationships of scientiﬁc cooperation
and friendship. In the early 2000s, the growing collaborations received a major
boost when the Swiss government-approved the creation of the National Centre of
Competence (NCCR) North–South, a vast, 12-year development-focused research
programme hosted by CDE that brought together six Swiss research institutions and
140 partner institutions in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. The programme estab-
lished a network of scientiﬁc and practical exchange on sustainability challenges
between researchers and students active in over 40 countries. In some cases, Southern
experts who had worked with CDE since the earliest days earned key positions in
regional programme hubs, helping to solidify their reputations and institutionalize
sustainability science at local universities in eastern Africa and elsewhere. Ulti-
mately, 140 young researchers from the global South earned doctorates within the
programme, in addition to 90 researchers from Switzerland and Europe. Perhaps most
signiﬁcantly, repeated surveys of Southern graduates from the programme showed
that the vast majority returned to work and advance their careers in the global South,
leading to mutually beneﬁcial “brain circulation” rather than exploitative “brain
366
C. Bader et al.
drain” (Karrer et al. 2023). Since 2012, the successor programme—IGS North–
South, also hosted at CDE—has carried on the work of facilitating doctoral-level
research exchange between up-and-coming Swiss scientists and their counterparts
in low- and middle-income countries of the global South.
Over the course of more than three decades, CDE’s partnership-based research
has vividly illustrated the advantages of long-term transboundary collaborations for
sustainable development (Michel et al. 2013). Above all, these international part-
nerships build research relationships rooted in a sense of shared mission, jointly
negotiated concepts and principles, and trust between individuals and institutions.
Southern researchers gain access to the scientiﬁc resources, expertise, and networks
of higher-income countries, not least of all enabling them to publish their results in
establishedjournals.Northernresearchersgainagroundedviewofdevelopmentchal-
lenges, ﬁrst-hand insights on data collection and management in a non-industrialized
context, as well as access to local communities and national policymakers in the
South, enhancing their personal motivation, credibility, and ability to effect change.
Both groups beneﬁt from the hands-on approach to real-world development chal-
lenges, which quickly drives home the need for collaboration across disciplines and
in concert with affected (Trechsel et al. 2020).
At the same time, CDE remains well-aware of the persistent shortcomings of
North–South research partnerships and the urgent need to transform them further. In
particular, as part of its wider ongoing efforts to “decolonize” sustainability research
and academia itself, CDE is actively working to strengthen the funding and agenda-
setting position of individual Southern researchers and institutional partners.
Tailored Exchange for Transdisciplinary Learning: A Knowledge Network to
Tackle Ecological Harms
Soil degradation, which impacts food security, climate change and biodiversity, is a
major global challenge. Using accumulated knowledge for effective land resource
management is key to address it. This is where the World Overview of Conservation
Approaches and Technologies (WOCAT) comes in, an initiative in which CDE has
long played an instrumental role. WOCAT is a global network on sustainable land
management (SLM) that closes knowledge gaps and spurs innovation.
Founded in 1992 and jointly managed by CDE, FAO, and ISRIC, WOCAT
has evolved into an esteemed global network that maintains a user-friendly global
database on SLM practices. Offering a treasure trove of practical knowledge, it has
been recognized by UNCCD as the primary global database of SLM best practices.
The UNCCD recognition gives WOCAT the mandate to support the 196 signatory
countries in recording their SLM best practices and using the SLM knowledge of
stakeholders worldwide—from land users to decision-makers—to improve local land
management. This dynamic alliance spans from land users to decision-makers and
promotes the sharing of knowledge and solutions.
WOCAT is an excellent example of collaboration that promotes mutual learning
between scientiﬁc actors and more practice-based stakeholders (e.g. small farmers),
driving overall sustainability and positive change around the world. In CDE’s quest
fortransdisciplinarylearning,WOCATisanimportantallythatreinforcesthecentre’s
Fostering Sustainability Through Research and Education? The …
367
vision of comprehensive, tailored knowledge co-production and sharing. Its extensive
database of SLM practices offers diverse solutions, linking theoretical concepts with
real-world application. The mix of academic and non-academic perspectives that
lies at the heart of transdisciplinarity is embodied in WOCAT’s pool of knowledge,
enablingco-creationofpractical,evidence-basedsolutions.TheglobalSLMdatabase
contains over 2,300 SLM good practices from all over the world and is linked to
WOCAT learning modules as well as external platforms, tools, and applications
such as the Framework for Ecosystem Restoration Monitoring (FERM). It serves
as a basis for various knowledge products, including good practice compilations,
scientiﬁc papers, policy briefs, books, factsheets, and videos that are co-produced
with different partners. Indeed, WOCAT has become CDE’s prototype programme
for a user-driven, citizen-science informed database. Other examples include the
Land Matrix, a database that compiles key facts on large-scale land acquisitions, and
the Lao Decide Info project, in which granular village-level socio-economic data are
made accessible for multiple uses by government and development agencies.
The WOCAT database is currently being linked to a digital application—the
“farmbetter” app—in the project “AgriPath: Empowering smallholder farmers’ tran-
sition to sustainable agriculture through effective and efﬁcient digital pathways”.
Together with users in the target countries, this application is being developed and
tailored to the needs of a large and diverse set of users. The algorithm of the “farmbet-
ter”appmatchesfarmers’needswiththeSLMsolutionsofferedintheglobalWOCAT
database. By providing farmers and extension services with tailored solutions that
can be shared, learned, and promoted digitally, smallholder farmers are empowered
to increase their agricultural productivity, income, and climate resilience. Ongoing
research is assessing the impact of these digitally provided services and comparing
them with other agricultural extension services. This is an illustration of how CDE
initiatives strive to inform and improve existing, locally anchored practices with
scientiﬁc insights for social and technological innovations.
4
Conclusion and Considerations for a Future Research
Agenda
In order to shape the future research agenda for sustainable development, CDE is
committed to expanding its traditional research domains by integrating emergent
themes and addressing areas previously underrepresented in sustainability research.
This includes giving greater attention to sectors like labour and employment and
investigating the central role of ﬁnancial markets in driving or preventing sustain-
ability transformations. Here, innovative post-growth frameworks are highly inspi-
rational and useful for exploring emerging themes. Opening up perspectives beyond
368
C. Bader et al.
traditional growth paradigms offers a new frontier to sustainability science. Mean-
while, CDE remains committed to engaging in critical discourses on global inequal-
ities, emphasizing the need to tackle disparities in order to achieve true, inclusive
sustainability.
One key challenge is to continue reﬁning the methodological repertoire of sustain-
ability research, further advancing transdisciplinary approaches and generating rele-
vant transformation knowledge. Adaptive methodological frameworks are imper-
ative to chart pathways to sustainability in the diverse contexts that CDE works
in. Methodological advances will also necessarily feed into CDE’s teaching and
educational programmes. Digitalization—carefully assessed for each purpose—will
enhance these efforts, widening the scope of tools, techniques, audiences, languages,
and approaches.
Another particularly crucial, far-reaching issue is the need to critically eval-
uate institutional structures, project architectures, and unfolding initiatives therein.
Decolonization, though not new to CDE’s working culture, has discursively regained
momentum globally and offers a useful framework for reassessment of institutional
governance structures within academia and beyond (Rakotonarivo and Andriami-
haja 2023). For its part, CDE not only fosters interdisciplinary teams that transcend
conventional academic boundaries, but is also increasingly working to transform
established academic hierarchies. In the context of its third tracer study of the IGS
School North–South (Karrer et al. 2023), CDE began reﬂecting more critically on
its programmes and structures through a decolonizing lens. It found that the ﬁrst
step towards addressing structural barriers in the academic world is asking the right
questions—such as: “Who is invited to sit at the expert table and who is systemi-
cally excluded?” (Rutazibwa 2018, p. 168) or “Why are we producing knowledge?”
(Rutazibwa2018,p.171).Decolonizationalsoentailsdeconstructingthepowerstruc-
tures that inﬂuence positions and careers in academia—power structures that are
easily reproduced if we do not raise awareness and challenge our own blind spots as
academics and researchers.
Concretely, CDE is actively working to develop models that empower diverse
young scientists all over the globe. Initiatives in this direction include signiﬁcant
revision of doctoral programme curricula, with the express aim of elevating the role
of Southern universities to positions of leadership and decision-making. This step
not only enriches the academic landscape, but will also ensure that voices from
the global South signiﬁcantly contribute to future research agendas for sustainable
development. Going forward, CDE is dedicated to fostering equitable collabora-
tions between universities from the global South and North (see also Rakotonarivo
and Andriamihaja 2023). Such partnerships are envisioned as platforms for mutual
learning and shared research, challenging traditional North-centric paradigms of
knowledge creation.
In aligning with a research agenda for sustainable development, the integration
of sustainability transformation and future competencies into university curricula
and teaching methodologies is paramount. This involves designing academic
programmes that not only impart knowledge about current sustainability challenges,
but also equip students with the skills, mindset and—increasingly—resilience,
Fostering Sustainability Through Research and Education? The …
369
needed for innovation and leadership in this ﬁeld. This points also to the inclusion
of transformative learning by encouraging critical self-reﬂection and a questioning
of preconceived notions, thereby fostering profound personal and societal change.
Courses should thus foster critical thinking, systems thinking, and aim for proﬁciency
in addressing questions within complex global interdependencies. By emphasizing
collaborative projects, problem-based learning, and real-world case studies, univer-
sities can ensure that students are trained to translate their theoretical models into
real-world contexts; to improve, upon that translation, their theories as well as their
practical approaches; and thus to be prepared to drive sustainable transformations. In
addition, the inclusion of cross-disciplinary studies and partnerships with industry
and communities can enrich the learning experience and provide students with a
broad and grounded understanding of sustainability in a wide variety of contexts.
This paradigm shift in education is critical to enable graduates who grasp sustain-
ability challenges, remain aware of their role as citizens, and are capable of designing
and implementing effective solutions that are embraced by those they are meant to
serve.
References
Adame F (2021) Meaningful collaborations can end ‘helicopter research.’ Nature. https://doi.org/
10.1038/d41586-021-01795-1
Amare T, Terefe A, Selassie YG, Yitaferu B, Wolfgramm B, Hurni H (2013) Soil properties and
crop yields along the Terraces and Toposequece of Anjeni Watershed, Central Highlands of
Ethiopia. J Agric Sci 5(2): Article 2. https://doi.org/10.5539/jas.v5n2p134
Barth M, Rieckmann M (2016) State of the Art in research on higher Education for sustainable
development.In:BarthM,MichelsenG,ThomasI(eds)Routledgehandbookofhighereducation
sustainable development. Routledge Taylor & Francis Group, pp 100–114
Baumgartner U, Bürgi Bonanomi E (2021) Drawing the line between sustainable and unsustain-
able ﬁsh: product differentiation that supports sustainable development through trade measures.
Environ Sci Eur 33:113. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12302-021-00551-6
Bonanomi EB, Tribaldos T (2020) PPM-Based trade measures to promote sustainable farming
systems? What the EU/EFTA-Mercosur agreements can learn from the EFTA-Indonesian agree-
ment. In: Bungenberg M, Krajewski M, Tams CJ, Terhechte JP, Ziegler AR (eds), European
yearbook of international economic law 2020. Springer, pp 359–385. https://doi.org/10.1007/
8165_2020_64
Brundiers K, Barth M, Cebrián G, Cohen M, Diaz L, Doucette-Remington S, Dripps W, Habron
G, Harré N, Jarchow M, Losch K, Michel J, Mochizuki Y, Rieckmann M, Parnell R, Walker P,
Zint M (2021) Key competencies in sustainability in higher education—toward an agreed-upon
reference framework. Sustain Sci 16(1):13–29. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-020-00838-2
CDE (2015) Spotlight on dealing with trade-offs in sustainable development (Annual report 2015;
CDE Annual Report). Centre for Development and Environment
CDE (2017) CDE Strategy 2016–2021. CDE Centre for Development and Environment
CDE (2021) CDE Strategy 2021–2024. CDE Centre for Development and Environment
Frey S, Bürgi Bonanomi E, Tribaldos T (2022) Better, But not sustainable: the impacts of Switzer-
land’s sector agreement on Soy Production in Brazil [Info:eu-repo/semantics/workingPaper].
In: Frey S, Bürgi Bonanomi E, Tribaldos T (eds) (Nov 2022). Better, but not sustainable: the
impacts of Switzerland’s sector agreement on Soy Production in Brazil (Working Paper NRP73
370
C. Bader et al.
NRP73-WP02–2022). Bern: Centre for Development and Environment (CDE), University of
Bern; Centre for Development and Environment (CDE), University of Bern. https://boris.unibe.
ch/174433/
Gesetz über die Universität (UniG) vom 5. Sept 1996, (5 Sept 1996). https://www.belex.sites.be.
ch/frontend/versions/1855?locale=de
Hammer T, Lewis AL (2023) Which competencies should be fostered in education for sustainable
development at highereducationinstitutions? Findingsfromthe evaluationofthe studyprograms
at the University of Bern, Switzerland. Disc Sustain 4(1):19. https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-
023-00134-w
Herweg K, Tribelhorn T, Lewis AL, Providoli I, Trechsel LJ, Steinböck C (2021) Transdisciplinary
learning for sustainable development. Sharing experience in course and curriculum design. In:
Herweg K, Tribelhorn T, Lewis AL, Providoli I, Trechsel LJ, Steinböck C (2021) Transdisci-
plinarylearningforsustainabledevelopment.sharingexperienceincourseandcurriculumdesign
[Lehrbuch]. Bern, Switzerland: Centre for Development and Environment (CDE), University
of Bern, with Bern Open Publishing (BOP). Centre for Development and Environment (CDE),
University of Bern, with Bern Open Publishing (BOP). https://boris.unibe.ch/157343/
Hurni H, Wiesmann U (2014) Transdisciplinarity in practice. Experience from a concept-based
research programme addressing global change and sustainable development. GAIA—Ecol
Perspect Sci Soc 23(3):275–277. https://doi.org/10.14512/gaia.23.3.15
Karrer L, Steinböck C, Trechsel LJ, da Silva T, Breu T (2023) IGS North-South Tracer Study
2022: Decolonizing a PhD Programme and Beyond. In: Karrer L, Steinböck C, Trechsel LJ,
da Silva T, Breu T (2023) IGS North-South tracer study 2022: decolonizing a PhD programme
and beyond Bern, Schweiz: Centre for Development and Environment (CDE), Universität Bern,
with Bern Open Publishing (BOP) [Info:eu-repo/semantics/report]. Centre for Development and
Environment (CDE), Universität Bern, with Bern Open Publishing (BOP). https://boris.unibe.
ch/182165/
Michel C, Stöckli B, Upreti BR, Wiesmann UM (2013) Research partnerships: the beneﬁts of North-
South collaboration. In: Michel C, Stöckli B, Upreti BR, Wiesmann UM (eds), Research part-
nerships: the beneﬁts of North-South collaboration (Evidence for Policy Series, Global Edition
15). Bern: NCCR North-South, vol 15. [Info:eu-repo/semantics/report]. NCCR North-South, p
4. http://www.nccr-north-south.unibe.ch/publications/Infosystem/On-line%20Dokumente/Upl
oad/15_Global_Policy_Research_Partnerships.pdf
Musselli I, Solar J, Tribaldos T, Bürgi Bonanomi E (2022a) Livestock farming act and WTO
compliance. Preferential tariff treatment based on PPMs: a case study. In: Musselli I, Solar
J, Tribaldos T, Bürgi Bonanomi E (eds) (Dezember 2022), Livestock farming act and WTO
compliance. Preferential tariff treatment based on PPMs: a case study (Working Paper NRP73
NRP73-WP05–2022). Bern: Centre for Development and Environment (CDE), University of
Bern, NRP73-WP05–2022. https://boris.unibe.ch/177792/
Musselli I, Solar J, Tribaldos T, Bürgi Bonanomi E (2022b) Tropical product act and WTO compli-
ance. preferential tariff treatment based on PPMs: a case study. Musselli I, Solar J, Tribaldos
T, Bürgi Bonanomi E (eds) (Dezember 2022), Tropical product act and WTO compliance.
Preferential tariff treatment based on PPMs: a case study (Working Paper NRP73 NRP73-
WP06–2022). Bern: Centre for Development and Environment (CDE), University of Bern,
Bern, NRP73-WP06–2022. https://boris.unibe.ch/177790/
Oberlack C, Breu T, Giger M, Harari N, Herweg KG, Mathez-Stiefel S-L, Messerli P, Moser S,
Ott C, Providoli I, Tribaldos TM, Zimmermann A, Schneider F (2019) Theories of change in
sustainability science: understanding how change happens. GAIA—Ökologische Perspektiven
Für Wissenschaft Und Gesellschaft/Ecol Persp Sci Soc 28(2):Article 2
Rakotonarivo OS, Andriamihaja OR (2023) Global North–Global South research partnerships are
still inequitable. Nat Hum Behav 7(12):Article 12. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-023-01728-0
Rutazibwa OU (2018) On babies and bathwater: decolonizing international development studies.
In: de Jong S, Icaza R, Rutazibwa OU (eds) Decolonization and feminisms in global teaching
and learning, 1st ed. Routledge, pp 159–180
Fostering Sustainability Through Research and Education? The …
371
Trechsel LJ, Diebold CL, Zimmermann AB, Fischer M (2023) Students between science and
society: why students’ learning experiences in transformative spaces are vital to higher educa-
tion institutions. Int J Sustain High Educ 24(9):85–101. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-09-2021-
0407
Trechsel LJ, Steinböck C, Ayeri Ogalleh S, Zimmermann A, Herweg KG, Breu T, Lannen A (2020)
Unlocking knowledge for sustainability: Partnership-based research and education. In: Trechsel
LJ, Steinböck C, Ayeri Ogalleh S, Zimmermann A, Herweg KG, Breu T, Lannen A Unlocking
knowledge for sustainability: partnership-based research and education (CDE Policy Brief 17).
Bern, Switzerland: Centre for Development and Environment, University of Bern, Switzerland,
vol 17, [Info:eu-repo/semantics/report]. Centre for Development and Environment, University
of Bern, Switzerland. https://www.cde.unibe.ch/research/cde_series/policy_briefs/unlocking_
knowledge_for_sustainability_partnership_based_research_and_education/index_eng.html
Trechsel LJ, Zimmermann AB, Steinböck C, Breu T, Herweg K, Thieme S (2021) Safe spaces
for disruptive learning in a north–south research partnership context: international mobility of
doctoral students. Sustainability 13(4):Article 4. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13042413
Wiek A, Withycombe L, Redman CL (2011) Key competencies in sustainability: a reference frame-
work for academic program development. Sustain Sci 6(2):203–218. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11
625-011-0132-6
The Role of the Ofﬁce
for the Environment at the University
of a Coruña in Promoting Sustainability
Verónica Torrijos, Martina Dono, Domingo Calvo-Dopico,
Amparo Casares-Gallego, and Manuel Soto
Abstract By working on issues such as governance, education, research, outreach,
and campus operations, higher education institutions play a critical role in achieving
sustainability, through green and sustainability ofﬁces that coordinate those efforts.
The Ofﬁce for the Environment (OMA-UDC) of the University of A Coruña (UDC)
was created in 2008 with the dual aim of taking responsibility for environmental
managementandpromotingtheawarenessandparticipationoftheuniversitycommu-
nity in environmental issues. The actions of the OMA-UDC started with a ﬁrst
analysis of the environmental impact of the UDC, the calculation of the ecological
footprint, the ﬁrst sectoral plans for energy and mobility and various actions in energy
saving and water use efﬁciency. At the same time, an environmental outreach program
has been launched in which the network of environmental scholarship students is a
key part. Later, the UDC joined the international program Eco Campus. These lines
of action were accompanied by research-action and learning-by-doing methodolo-
gies, which showed greater potential for the implementation of sustainability goals.
The current programs of the OMA-UDC are: education for sustainability, manage-
ment of forest spaces on campus and biodiversity, urban vegetable gardens, on-
site composting systems for organic waste from the canteens, selective collection
V. Torrijos · M. Dono · M. Soto (B)
Universidade da Coruña, Ofﬁce for the Environment, Ed. Xoana Capdevielle, Campus de Elviña,
15071 A Coruña, Spain
e-mail: m.soto@udc.gal
V. Torrijos
e-mail: v.torrijos@udc.gal
M. Dono
e-mail: martina.rey.dono@udc.gal
D. Calvo-Dopico
Universidade da Coruña, Vice-Rector for Economy and Strategic Planning, Rúa Maestranza, 9,
15001 A Coruña, Spain
e-mail: domingo.calvo.dopico@udc.es
A. Casares-Gallego
Universidade da Coruña, Vice-Rector for Infrastructure and Sustainability, Ed. Xoana
Capdevielle, Campus de Elviña, 15071 A Coruña, Spain
e-mail: amparo.casares@udc.es
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_22
373
374
V. Torrijos et al.
and waste prevention, eco-audits for water saving, bicycle loan, ecological foot-
print calculation, and coordination of environmental volunteering, among others.
This paper describes these programs, the sustainability management structure at
UDC and the role played by OMA-UDC as a tool for promoting sustainability in a
medium-sized university located on the periphery of Europe.
Keywords Sustainability · HEIs · Campus · Green ofﬁces · Participation
1
Introduction
The climate crises we are facing today is no longer a doubt, but a statement. The way
the ruling socio-economic system is threatening life on Earth has already showed
some cruel evidence of its great impact in many different shapes, which somehow
discerns the future that awaits. That is why the key question now is how to mitigate
the changes and adapt to the new conditions (IPCC 2022).
In this matter, there are many agents that play an essential role in worsening the
situation, but also having the potential to contribute to the solution. Higher Educa-
tion Institutions (HEI), albeit contributing themselves by their own carbon foot-
print, they also have a special social responsibility and should “lead by example”,
as they contribute to the education of future leaders, they perform an outstanding
part of research, and they may constitute a model of action and awareness around
sustainability (Bautista-Puig and Sanz-Casado 2021; Amaral et al. 2015).
However, as stated by Leal Filho et al. (2019), sustainability in HEIs is a multi-
dimensional topic, and should be addressed as so. The six categories they propose
are (a) Institutional frameworks, (b) Campus operations (resources, management,
and infrastructure); (c) Teaching; (d) Research; (e) Outreach/Collaboration; and (f)
Assessment and Reporting. Moreover, as stated by the Sustainable Development
Goals, sustainability should be approached through a triple vision: environmental,
economic, and social (Martínez-Buján et al. 2020).
Inthatsense,GreenandSustainabilityOfﬁcesariseasagoodandeffectivestrategy
for coordinating the efforts towards sustainability in HEIs (Leal Filho et al. 2019).
In fact, 65% of the top 100-ARWU (Academic Ranking of World Universities) 2015
ranking had an ofﬁce of this characteristics with broad and diverse areas of action,
being the most typical type of Institutional Organ for sustainability (Salvioni et al.
2017).
However, although useful, they are usually not sufﬁcient, as they encounter obsta-
cles that hinder their work, such as “lack of speciﬁc funding and lack of support
from the administrations”. Moreover, although mobilization and integration of staff
and students are a usual objective of these ofﬁces, they often experiment difﬁculties
reaching and engaging students (Leal Filho et al. 2019). As highlighted by Adomßent
et al. (2019), students should be seen as contributors for sustainability progress in
HEIs, not only as addressees of the politics implemented by the institution. There-
fore, different types of student and staff participation may be considered to effectively
The Role of the Ofﬁce for the Environment at the University of a Coruña …
375
involve them towards the construction of a “strong institutional culture of sustain-
ability”, at the same time they actively participate in their own education and training
on sustainability.
It is for this purpose that the combination of research and actions of sustainability
manifest its great potential. Action research and learning-by-doing methodologies
are attracting great interest for their potential contributions to sustainability. These are
methodologies whose paradigm combines theory and practice, integrating learning,
researchandactionandincludingcollaborativepartnershipsandahighlevelofreﬂex-
ivity. It stimulates transformative learning among participants, seeking to improve
the situation of participants and social transformation (Cebrián et al. 2015; Cicek
et al. 2019). Action research projects are carried out by professional researchers and
the members of an organization, community or network, i.e. stakeholders, through
the cycle of planning, implementation, observation and critical reﬂection (Torrijos
et al. 2020). On the other hand, learning by doing is active, hands-on and engaging
for students.
AnotherstrategyforpromotingsustainabilityimplementedinmanyUniversitiesis
the Eco Campus program, coordinated by the Foundation for Environmental Educa-
tion (FEE), which is known as Green Campus at UDC. This program started in 2003
and at this date counts with 125 registered campuses. It constitutes a broad frame-
work that, through a seven-steps procedure, pursues to involve university community,
especially students, in the implementation of sustainability measures on campus and
seeking long term commitment to continuous improvement and systemic integration
of a sustainability perspective (FEE 2022). Those campuses that correctly implement
the seven steps methodology, develop their own action plan, and reach their objec-
tives are awarded the Green Flag (Pérez-Montero 2020), which has to be renewed
every two years, in order to assure their commitment to constant improvement
(Ryan-Fogarty et al. 2016).
This article analyzes the speciﬁc case of the work developed by the Environment
Ofﬁce of the University of Coruña (OMA-UDC, name changed to Ofﬁce of Sustain-
ability (OdS) in May 2024) as well as the progress and participation in sustainability
issues achieved in recent years, all within the framework of the UDC’s sustainability
management structure. The article includes the analysis of the research developed
in close collaboration with the OMA-UDC or that was the result of action research
programs. This is due to an approach where OMA-UDC’s sustainability actions
incorporate not only the active participation of the university community, but also
research methodologies to deﬁne and improve actions, as well as their monitoring
and evaluation. This applies, in particular, to the promotion of selective waste collec-
tion in educational centers, to decentralized composting on campus, to awareness,
prevention and efﬁciency in water use, to the use of nature-based solutions in the
campus, to the study and conservation of the natural environment and its enjoyment,
to the calculation and analysis of the ecological footprint, as well as to general educa-
tion programs for sustainability. It was also carried out by including service-learning
and project-based learning approaches (Bugallo-Rodríguez and Vega-Marcote 2020;
Servia et al. 2020; Torrijos et al. 2021; Dono et al. 2023).
376
V. Torrijos et al.
2
Description of the Sustainability Management Structure
at UDC
2.1
The Context: The UDC as an Institution, General Data
and Figures
In the academic year 2021/2022, with a renewal of 3,407 new students, the UDC
community reached 17.104 students, 1.444 teaching and research staff, 796 admin-
istrative staff members and 411 employees in other job categories (UDC 2022b).
The UDC area of inﬂuence comprises more than 600,000 inhabitants, corresponding
to the contiguous counties of A Coruña and Ferrol. UDC is one of the three public
universities of Galicia, an autonomous region of Spain with about 2,700,000 inhab-
itants, in which Galician and Spanish are the ofﬁcial languages. Because Galician
is the minoritized language, the University states in its Statutes (UDC 2022c) that
Galician is the normal vehicle of expression and its use will be encouraged in all
activities.
The University of A Coruña is territorially structured in the two campuses of A
Coruña and Ferrol (Fig. 1), with the ﬁrst one concentrating 84.4% of the students
(UDC 2022b). However, these two campuses include 8 different geographical loca-
tions. Two of these areas, Elviña and A Zapateira, which belong to the Coruña
Campus, are located contiguous on the edge of the urban area and constitute the
UDC Main Campus.
The main Campus is located in a marginal space in terms of the conservation of
natural ecosystems, with invasive and ruderal species being dominant, although with
vestiges of the ancient and fertile valley of the orchards of Elviña and the heritage
value of the Celtic fort located there, and which bears the same name. The topography
determines the difference between the areas of Elviña and A Zapateira. Zapateira is
the highest area, reaching 170 m above sea level. There are several centers that include
Philology, Tourism, Architecture, Chemistry and Biology studies. It also contains the
Monte da Fraga, an area of botanical and forestry interest. From this area there is
a sharp difference in level to the adjacent campus of Elviña, at only 36 m above
sea level. Elviña campus hosts most of the students. Other areas of implementation
of the UDC are those of Oza, Riazor and Bastiagueiro, the latter belonging to the
Municipality of Oleiros, bordering A Coruña. In addition, A Maestranza, an area
located on the coast of the city of A Coruña, hosts the administrative building of the
Rectory and the Nautical classroom. In the three areas of A Maestranza, Riazor and
Oza, most of the buildings have architectural and historical interest.
The Ferrol Campus has ﬁve study centers and other buildings that house admin-
istrative, research and study services. Very close to the center of Ferrol, it is a purely
urban campus but of important botanical, gardening and architectural value (UDC
2022d).
Further details of campus locations can be found on the UDC web link (UDC
2022a). Table 1 shows a summary of the main ﬁgures of the UDC. The space occupied
The Role of the Ofﬁce for the Environment at the University of a Coruña …
377
Fig. 1 Location of the University of A Coruña: a General location in the northwest of the Iberian
Peninsula, b Location of the buildings of the A Coruña Campus, c Location of the buildings of the
Ferrol Campus. Source of the maps: Google Maps
378
V. Torrijos et al.
Table 1 General data and ﬁgures of the University of A Coruña
Type of higher education institution
Public and comprehensive
Climate
Humid continental
Number of campus site
– Maestranza
– Oza
– Riazor
– Bastiagueiro
– Elviña (main campus)
– A Zapateira (main campus)
– Ferrol (Esteiro and Serantes)
Total number of main buildings
8 sites. Main buildings:
−1 AD (Rector´s ofﬁce)
−2 TC + 1 AD
−1 TC + 2 AD
−1 TC + 1 (Sports)
−6 TC + 5 RC + 2 AD + 2 (Sports, Stadio)
−4 TC + 1 (Sports)
−6 TC + 2 RC + 3 AD + 1 (Sports)
40
Studies
Ofﬁcial qualiﬁcations (degrees and masters)
Doctoral programs
Own titles studies
Research groups
103
36
35
123
Main campus setting
Suburban
Total campus area (m2)
559,320
Total campus ground ﬂoor area of buildings (m2)
94,181
Total campus buildings area (m2)
306,684
Total area on campus covered in forest vegetation
(m2)
112,599
TC: Teaching center, RC: Research center, AD: Administrative center
by the campuses covers a total area of 559,320 m2, while the built surface (all ﬂoors)
reaches 306,684 m2. The area covered by forest vegetation totals 11 ha, of which
more than 4 are in a single piece, corresponding to Monte da Fraga, in the A Zapateira
area. Also, the UDC has approximately 40 main buildings, of which 21 are teaching
and mixed centers (teaching and research), and the rest are research, technological
and administrative centers.
The biogeographical criteria of this area include it in the Eurosiberian Region,
Cantabrian-Atlantic province, Galician-Portuguese sector (UDC 2011), character-
ized by a humid continental climate, but with an oceanic character and mild
temperatures, weak thermal contrasts and a short period of summer drought.
2.2
Sustainability in the UDC and the Role of the Ofﬁce
for the Environment
The 2013–2020 Strategic Plan of the UDC was in force until 2022, therefore during
the years that relate to this article (UDC 2013). This strategic planning included a
series of objectives and indicators, with two horizons, 2015 and 2020. Among them,
The Role of the Ofﬁce for the Environment at the University of a Coruña …
379
some stand out: (i) the preparation of environmental plans at school level, reaching
a minimum of 6 teaching centers before 2015 and all of them before 2020, (ii) the
implementation of the culture of recycling, with the aim of achieving the separate
collection of 80% of waste in 2020, (iii) the promotion of more sustainable mobility,
reducing the use of private cars in 2020 by 30% compared to 2008, (iv) the improve-
ment in energy efﬁciency, with the aim of reducing speciﬁc annual consumption by
10% in 2020 compared to 2011, as well as in (v) water savings, to achieve in 2020 a
10% reduction in consumption compared to 2011. The follow-up of these objectives
was assigned to the OMA-UDC.
Some results in relation to these objectives and indicators will be presented
throughout this article. Meanwhile, the renewal of the strategic plan is currently
underway, covering the period 2022–2026. This renewal process included a special-
ized work group in the area of “Social Responsibility and Sustainability”, following
the vision of the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) for the transition to
a more ecological model of society that respects the environment and people.
An outline of the different services related to or complementary to environmental
sustainability at the UDC is shown in Fig. 2. The rector’s team includes the Rector, the
General Secretariat, the Management and nine vice-rectorships. The OMA-UDC is a
service that depends on the Vice-rectorship of Infrastructure and Sustainability (VIS),
which is the one with the greatest impact on sustainability issues. The Architecture,
Urbanism and Equipment Service also depends on the VIS, as well as the facilities
maintenance service. Another ﬁve vice-chancellorships are related to the issues of
environmental and social sustainability, complementing directly or indirectly the
scope of action of the OMA-UDC. Added to this are the services that depend on
the General Secretariat, such as the prevention of occupational risks (SPRL) and the
service for normalizing the use of the Galician language (SNL).
The thematic areas of the UDC are framed in three specialization campuses, one
of which is directly related to environmental content, the “Sustainability Campus”,
which promotes training and transversal research in the following four lines of
action: City and territory, Circular and sustainable economy, Social sustainability
and environmental education, and Healthy lifestyle. The other two areas of special-
ization are the “Industrial Campus”, focused on the industrial ﬁelds linked to the
economic potential of the region, especially in the naval and ocean ﬁeld, and the
“Innova Campus”, which deals with the impact of innovation on economic growth
and business development promoted by the university.
2.3
The Operating Structure of the OMA-UDC
The OMA-UDC participates in the coordination and implementation of different
environmental actions at the UDC. Its objectives fall into two priority areas: environ-
mental management and the awareness and participation of the university community
in issues related to the environment and sustainability. In this way, the actions of the
380
V. Torrijos et al.
Fig. 2 Map about different services related or complementary to environmental sustainability and
to the OMA-UDC
OMA-UDC can be framed in the following thematic blocks: (1) Environmental infor-
mation and disclosure on the UDC campuses, (2) Environmental participation and
co-responsibility, and (3) Sectoral projects related to environmental management and
sustainability. For its actions, the OMA-UDC currently counts with hired technical
staff (1 or 2 people), a network of students with scholarships, the hiring of external
services, and a part-time management ﬁgure.
The management of the OMA-UDC exercises the function of coordination. This
function is carried out by a member of the teaching staff with partial dedication
to these tasks. Since the creation of the OMA-UDC in 2008, scholarship students
have been signed, who initially performed work tasks (graduate students) and from
2011 participated in mixed training-diffusion programs (undergraduate students). In
addition, since the beginning of 2018, OMA-UDC has had one person hired to carry
out technical environmental work, develop environmental projects and collaborate in
the coordination of scholarship staff, among other tasks. Recently, since December
2021, a second person has joined this technical team.
For the good functioning of the OMA-UDC and to amplify the service to the
different locations and university disciplines, the collaboration of the scholarship
staff, who develop awareness and communication tasks towards the university
community, especially the student body, was decisive. This is a program of collabo-
ration and complementary training carried out in the OMA-UDC and in the centers
that have a Green Campus program (i.e. centers adhered to the international FEE
Eco Campus program). These scholarships are called by the Vice-rectorship for
Students, Participation and Employability and granted for 9 months (currently, after
The Role of the Ofﬁce for the Environment at the University of a Coruña …
381
the outbreak of COVID-19, only for 7 months) and have a dedication of 8 h per week.
These students receive a monthly ﬁnancial allowance for their participation in the
program. The call is repeated each academic year for the renewal of places, without
them being occupied by the same people from previous years. These scholarships
seek the theoretical and practical training of undergraduate students in the ﬁeld of
environment and sustainability, forming a multidisciplinary team, with scholarship
holders from almost all the degrees offered at the UDC. Until 2017, given the lack of
its own technical staff, the coordination of this network of scholarship holders was
carried out by an environmental NGO hired for that purpose.
Finally, to guarantee a professional and stable operation over time of certain
services offered and coordinated by the OMA-UDC, it was necessary to hire external
entities, usually environmental NGOs. Among the thematic lines with the partic-
ipation of these entities stand out: (1) sustainable mobility and the bicycle loan
service, with the Mobi-Liza association in charge of advising and training bicycle
users who renew each academic year, ( 2) the urban gardens, with Xestión Agro-
gandeira e Natureza SL being in charge of the training in ecological agriculture for
the people granted with plots for biannual periods, (3) the weekly management of
the composting areas developed by Deloga and Ecos do Sur, which train local and
immigrant people at risk of exclusion as master composters for their effective incor-
poration into a job, (4) the Proxecto Rios for the inspection of the Lagar river at the
Elviña Campus, (5) the custody of Monte da Fraga and the study and protection
of biodiversity, with the NGOs ADEGA (Association for the Ecological Defense of
Galicia) and GN Hábitat (Grupo Naturalista Hábitat), among others.
The participation of these entities also responds to another objective such as the
involvement of local society in university life, as well as that of opening the university
to local social and environmental problems.
3
Main Lines of Action of the OMA-UDC
3.1
Evolution of Different Sustainability Action Programs
at UDC
While the UDC was created in 1989, the creation of the OMA-UDC would not take
place until 19 years later, in February 2008. At that time, period 2008–2009, the main
undertaking of the OMA-UDC was the preparation of a ﬁrst report of environmental
assessment of the UDC, the start of the bicycle loan program and some ﬁrst actions in
environmental dissemination (Table 2). In 2009, the environment and sustainability
scholarship program for students also began, initially limited to the main campus, but
consolidated from 2015 in combination with the Green Campus program, gradually
reaching all study centers.
In the following two years, sectoral actions were initiated, such as the prepara-
tion of a ﬁrst public space and transport plan, an energy diagnosis, or the Sostauga
382
V. Torrijos et al.
Table 2 Main milestones and programmes initiated and maintained by OMA-UDC
Year (from 2008 to 2021)
Milestones and
programes
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
Environmental
evaluation report
x
x
x
x
x
International evaluation
(Green Metric ranking)
Bicycle loan service
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
General sustainability
outreach programmes
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Biodiversity
management at ‘Monte
da Fraga’
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
**
**
**
**
**
**
Environmental
scholarship staff
*
*
*
*
**
**
**
***
***
***
***
Energy diagnosis
x
Public space and
transport plan
x
Sostauga project
On campus composting
*
*
**
**
**
**
**
***
***
***
***
Green purchasing
initiatives
a
b
c
d
Vegetable garden loan
service
*
*
*
*
**
**
**
**
**
Waste managemente
*
*
**
**
**
Green Campus
programme
*
*
**
**
**
***
***
***
Education for
sustainability
programme
x
x
x
x
x
Ecological footprint
calculators
*
*
**
**
**
Diffusion program in
secondary education
*
*
**
TFG-TFM
sustainability awards
x
x
x
x
project dedicated to sustainability in the water cycle at the UDC, all of them in close
collaboration with the Service of Architecture, Urbanism and Equipment (SAUE).
Initial attention was also paid to the conservation of biodiversity, particularly in the
forest area of Monte da Fraga. This period (2010–2011) also saw the start of the
composting program on campus, aimed mainly at organic waste from university
canteens. In the following years, the work of the OMA-UDC continued in these two
The Role of the Ofﬁce for the Environment at the University of a Coruña …
383
programs related to the use of water and the composting of organic waste, which was
soon complemented by the project of urban gardens (2013).
Alreadyinthemostrecentyears(2017onwards),theMontedaFraga conservation
project was strengthened and the Education for Sustainability program was initiated.
The latter was associated with the development of online tools for the calculation of
the ecological footprint and the dissemination of issues related to sustainability both
in the UDC and in secondary schools in the region.
3.2
Current Lines of Action of the OMA-UDC
The main lines of action of the OMA-UDC and some services and activities that
it currently offers are those indicated in Table 3. The OMA-UDC is in charge of
waste management, water efﬁciency, low-impact mobility resources (bicycles, elec-
tric bicycles, …) and the management of certain areas of the campus, such as the
urban gardens, the Monte da Fraga forest area, the bodies of water present on the
campuses. In other areas, such as the use of energy, public road space, urban planning,
buildings, and maintenance, management and planning correspond to the SAUE, in
which the OMA-UDC participates by providing criteria for sustainability.
We can see in Table 3 that the lines of action are not limited to the university
environment, but seek to go further, to the domestic and municipal sphere.
With the development of the Education for Sustainability project (Campus-Home-
City: Labs of Change), the sectoral work lines in water, energy and waste were
extended to the area of residence of members of the university community interested
in participating in this type of action. The similarity, total or partial, in energy, water
and waste issues between the university center as a work or study environment and
the domestic environment, is the basis of the development of OMA-Emapic tools
for the calculation of the ecological footprint of those components, as well as of the
eco-audit manuals and practical workshops offered by OMA-UDC in these subjects.
Under this idea of “Campus-Home-City: Labs of Change” actions are combined in
awareness, training and changes in environmental behavior (and, in some cases, also
in the material means used) that seek to advance more pro-environmental lifestyles.
Thus, we take advantage of the synergies between the actions on campus and at
home, in the ﬁrst instance, and ﬁnally in the area of the city, that is to say, of the local
community.
The OMA-UDC prepares annual or one-off reports relating to the sectoral lines
of action. These reports are necessary for a good monitoring of the actions and for
the registration and subsequent evaluation thereof. All reports are posted in each
speciﬁc section of the website (https://www.udc.es/gl/sociedade/medio_ambiente/),
with access to the general public.
In the following sections, some of the main thematic lines of action of the OMA-
UDC are detailed.
384
V. Torrijos et al.
Table 3 Current lines of action of the OMA-UDC and related services and activities
Action line
Main service offered
Other actions
Sustainable mobility
– Bicycle loan
– Participation in mobility
planning at the UDC
– Participatory activities:
Itineraries by bike,
Workshops on ergonomics,
maintenance, safe
circulation…
– European Mobility Week,
Challenge 30 days by bike
Ecological footprint
– OMA-Emapic application
for the online calculation of
the carbon footprint
– Calculation of the
components of the
ecological footprint of
waste, energy, mobility
– Mapping the efﬁciency in
the use of water
– Mapping of noise pollution
Energy
– Home energy eco-audit
manual (advice, tutoring)
– Solar meeting (solar kitchen
and diffusion of solar
energy)
– Awareness campaigns for
energy saving in the center
– Disclosure of renewable
energy facilities on campus
Water
– UDC Sostauga Plan
– Water eco-audit manuals in
centers and at home (advice,
tutoring)
– Campaign to prevent the
consumption of bottled
water and promote the
consumption of tap water
– Review and installation of
water-saving equipment
– Monitoring of the control of
wastewater discharges into
the municipal network of A
Coruña
Waste
– Planning of waste
management in the UDC
– Installation and
management of composting
areas on campuses
– Implementation of separate
intra-center waste collection
– Eco-audit of waste
– European week for waste
prevention
– Waste survey of the Spanish
Institute of Statistics
– Exhibition “Waste at the
UDC: Nostián Model”
Biodiversity and ecosystems
– Monte da Fraga forest
restoration and custody
project
– Rivers Project (Proxecto
Ríos)
– Control of invasive exotic
species on campus
– Biodiversity study through
bioblitz actions
– Itineraries around the
campus
– Participatory reforestation
(continued)
The Role of the Ofﬁce for the Environment at the University of a Coruña …
385
Table 3 (continued)
Action line
Main service offered
Other actions
Urban gardens and food
– Design and maintenance of
urban gardens on campus
– Rental of urban gardens to
the university community
– Training in organic
agriculture for people who
use the orchards
– Training and awareness in
healthy and sustainable food
Educating for sustainability
– Environmental March
(general sustainability
outreach)
– Course
Campus-Home-City: Labs
of Change
– Education and awareness
activities spread throughout
the course, including the
demand from UDC services
and teachers
– Sustainability workshops:
energy, water, waste, noise
pollution, recycling…
Environmental assessment and
sustainability
– Generation and/or
management of basic
information on
sustainability at the UDC
– Complete the UI Green
Metric evaluation
– Complete the sustainability
assessment using the
GESU-CRUE tool
– Provide basic information
for the corporate social
responsibility report
– Provide basic information
for THE Impact ranking
regarding the ODS 2030
Eco-Campus (Green Campus)
– General coordination of the
participation and evaluation
of the UDC centers in the
international
Eco-Campus-FEE program
– Management of the
agreement between the
UDC and ADEAC for the
implementation of the
Green Campus program at
the UDC
– Advice to Green Campus
Committees
– Participation in the ﬁnal
inspection process
Environmental volunteering
– Coordination of the
environmental line of
volunteering at the UDC, in
collaboration with the
Cooperation and
Volunteering Ofﬁce
– Volunteer participation in
various discrete activities
distributed throughout the
course
– Continuous volunteer action
on a speciﬁc theme (waste,
composting, water,
biodiversity…)
X: repeated actions (intensity level not applicable). *Initial/low level intensity. **Medium inten-
sity. ***Higher intensity. Sostauga project: sustainability in water and water ecosystems manage-
ment and use. TFG: Undergraduate thesis, TFM: Master’s thesis. aStarting for gardening procure-
ment. bStarting for paper purchase. cStarting speciﬁcations documents for vending machines,
dand canteens. eWaste management includes the ﬁrst municipal waste management plan and the
implementation and monitoring of source separation of municipal waste.
386
V. Torrijos et al.
3.2.1
The Forest Space of Monte Da Fraga
In 2006, the University of A Coruña restored the space between the faculties of
Science and Philology, removing most of the eucalyptus trees (a non-native species
that causes multiple negative impacts on the ecosystem and the water cycle) and
reforesting it with native species representative of the Galician forests. With the
restoration of this space, the UDC intended to:
– Offer a space with triple potential: dissemination, teaching and research, for active
and interactive learning about the environment and sustainability. The space also
hosts a water treatment plant through a constructed wetland, sustainable urban
drainage systems, and spaces for teaching practices in botany and ecology, for
identiﬁcation and knowledge of biodiversity, for leisure and ecological trails, etc.)
– Promote the participation of environmental volunteers in the UDC in the custody
of the territory and the ecological recovery of the space.
– Offer a green and natural reference to the city of A Coruña, due to the location
of Monte da Fraga on the urban border of the city and its enormous landscape
potential, with views of Castro de Elviña, the city and the ocean.
– Recover and conserve ecosystems speciﬁc to the oceanic climate of the Atlantic
region,withreforestationactionswithrepresentativespecies,creationofwetlands,
elimination of invasive exotic species and promotion of biodiversity.
In recent years, an intensive program of activities has been carried out centered on
the Monte da Fraga area (Fig. 3). For the work in this space, the OMA-UDC has the
regular participation of researchers from the botany area of the biology department
and the environmental NGOs ADEGA and GN Hábitat, as well as other specialized
associations such as the UDC Big Bang (identiﬁcation and collection of mushrooms),
Sorex (bats studies), Amarelas (forest baths).
3.2.2
Education for Sustainability
‘Education for Sustainability’ is a project that seeks to advance in the formation of
the university community and citizenship in the basic concepts of environmental and
social sustainability and develop its capacity to act on those issues that are nowadays
priorities. Conceived as a multidisciplinary program, it covers a wide range of ages,
extending the last calls to children’s, primary and secondary education, in addition
to the university audience targeted by the previous editions. The target audience are
students, but also includes the teachers and people working in educational centers,
such as administrative, research, gardening, or dining rooms staff, among others.
Under the general name ‘Campus, Home, City; Labs for change’, the ‘Education
for Sustainability’ program includes the ‘Environmental March 2022’, an online
summer course on ‘Ecological footprint and climate emergency: contributions from
the UDC’, as well as speciﬁc actions spread throughout the academic course.
Throughout the ﬁve editions developed until 2022 at UDC, it has reached 10,449
participants with an average dedication time of 2 h. Each edition renews the content
The Role of the Ofﬁce for the Environment at the University of a Coruña …
387
Fig. 3 Some education and awareness activities in Monte da Fraga. 1. Flora biodiversity mapping,
2, 7, 8. Interpretative routes, 3. Volunteering reforestation, 4, 9. Construction and placing of bird nest
houses, 5. Creation of wetland zone, 6. Biodiversity inspection at wetland zone, 10, 11. Removal
of invasive exotic ﬂora
of the program, innovating and offering topics of interest in the nearest present, which
are addressed through different types of activities: conferences, panel-tables discus-
sion, workshops, volunteering, cinema, among others (Fig. 4). The University of A
Coruña accredits the involvement of students in these training actions, including the
recognition of credits for degree students in accordance with the regulations updated
annually (Annex I, point 8: UDC 2022f).
Meanwhile, last year’s primary and secondary school participation reached 442
students and 29 teachers from six centers in A Mariña (Lugo), with more than 800 h
of dedication. In addition, three centers carried out sustainability projects related to
waste separation, composting and energy saving.
3.2.3
OMA-Emapic Calculators of Ecological Footprint
OMA-Emapic calculators are currently available for both mobile and computer
devices at the following link: https://emapic.es/custom/oma, under the input viewer
shown in Fig. 5. The tools are linked to each other for the calculation of the overall
Ecological Footprint, facilitating to know the complete CO2 emissions associated
with the current lifestyle of people, being possible to participate independently in
each tool. A speciﬁc feature of the tool is the positioning of contributors on the map,
thus promoting citizen science through participatory geo-referencing (Varela-García
et al. 2022).
388
V. Torrijos et al.
Fig. 4 Some activities from ‘Education for Sustainability’ Project. 1, 2, 9, 10. Workshops for
construction of solar oven, biodiversity of soils, composting food waste, water eco-audit; 3, 4.
Visits to sustainability equipment: photovoltaic solar installation, wastewater treatment plant; 5, 6.
Conferences; 7. Environmental volunteering for beaches cleaning; 8. Panels of thematic exhibitions
for free visit
Fig. 5 OMA-Emapic calculator tool. Left: Three components of ecological footprint: mobility,
waste, energy. Right: water consumption efﬁciency tool. Link: https://emapic.es/custom/oma
This application is adapted to the geographical area of Galiza for the calculation
of various components of the ecological footprint, through the carbon footprint:
energy, waste and mobility, as well as the collaborative mapping of water-consuming
equipment (taps, cisterns). The statistical results of participation are dynamic, so they
change with each new contribution. From de starting of each tool the results at July
The Role of the Ofﬁce for the Environment at the University of a Coruña …
389
Table 4 Participation on OMA-Emapic carbon footprint tool
Component
(starting date)
WASTE (October
2017)
WATER (April
2018)
MOBILITY
(December 2019)
ENERGY
(March 2021)
Contributions
(number)
2.162
512
208
93
Emissions
(kgCO2/
people·year)a
118,42
6,39a
899,19
608,49
aThe indicator for water use is the mean ﬂow (L/min) of taps
Source https://emapic.es/custom/oma (accessed on 27 July 2022)
2022 are shown at Table 4. The components of the ecological footprint considered
have also been progressively expanded, with a tool currently being developed for the
food-related component.
The application of these tools for sustainability has an interesting potential that
is evident in lines such as: (1) promotion and better learning of the terms of sustain-
ability, (2) contribution of online tools for the understanding and learning of sustain-
ability, especially for the Z and Alpha generations (from the year 2000 and 2010,
respectively), (3) environmental education through the analysis of daily habits and
teaching tips, (4) information obtained from the calculation of different components
of the carbon footprint and derived learning.
The development of these tools requires research on the situation of each topic in
the geographical and social context of the area of application, which in this case was
the one corresponding to Galiza as an autonomous community of the Spanish State
(Soto and Varela 2018). The infrastructures for waste management, energy produc-
tion, transport and mobility, together with cultural and consumption habits condition
basic aspects of the applied methodologies. The ecological footprint calculator for
food and clothing is still pending.
3.2.4
Sostauga Project and Rivers Project
Launched in 2010, the Sostauga project aims to achieve a sustainable use of water
and improve the quality of water and associated ecosystems. To achieve this goal,
the Sostauga project deﬁned some priority goals to be achieved through applied
research on campus, environmental education and awareness activities. Among these
goals and priorities, the following stand out: the reduction of water consumption in
university facilities and activities (Torrijos et al. 2020), the potential use of endoge-
nous resources (rainwater, underground and spring water) (Carballeira et al. 2011),
the study of the feasibility of an ecological wastewater treatment model based on
constructed wetlands (Carballeira et al. 2021; Sánchez et al. 2023), the management
of urban runoff through nature-based solutions through bioﬁlters and rain gardens
(Lage et al. 2019) and the potential for the restoration of the campus’ pre-existing
river courses.
390
V. Torrijos et al.
Fig. 6 Images of different actions and activities related to sustainability at the UDC. 1. Bicycle
loan service; 2. Rivers Project; 3. Urban gardens on campus; 4. Group of scholarship students: 5.
Green Flag; 6. Volunteers in the UDC composting area
Sostauga also promotes environmental education and awareness among the entire
academic community. With this aim, since 2011 the methodology of the Rivers
Project (‘Proxecto Ríos’: ADEGA 2005) has been applied, in particular in a stretch
of the Lagar River as it passes through the Elviña Campus. The Rivers Project is
a Galician environmental volunteer network for river inspection through quality
parameters based on biodiversity and the physical and chemical quality of aquatic
ecosystems (Fig. 6(2)). Due to its educational interest, since 2017, the activities of
the Rivers Project have been incorporated into the Service-Learning program of the
Faculty of Sciences. It was also the subject of several Degree Thesis at the UDC.
3.2.5
Composting and Urban Vegetable Gardens
The dining hall waste composting program on campus began in 2010 and was born
linked to an urban vegetable garden project that was ﬁnally launched in 2013. The
goal of the composting program is to produce high-quality organic amendments and
fertilizers to be used in urban agriculture and campus gardening. This association
composting-gardens-food production forms an ideal situation in which two of the
objectives of the sustainability policy of the UDC are met, such as the dissemina-
tion and promotion of local-traditional and ecological agricultural practices and the
sustainable management of organic waste (Torrijos et al. 2021). The UDC currently
has 9 composting areas in different locations on campus (Fig. 6(6)). It also has 40
plots of urban gardens (20 m2 each) for renting to members of the university commu-
nity (students and staff) for a period of up to 4 consecutive years (Fig. 6(3)). New
settlements for the expansion of urban vegetable gardens are currently under study.
This combination provides a robust service to the university community that is
well received by students and staff. On a scale of 1 to 4 points, the gardens of the
The Role of the Ofﬁce for the Environment at the University of a Coruña …
391
UDC were rated with 3 (45%) and 4 (52%) points by the users, in the responses to
a survey carried out in the fall of 2019. This represents a very positive assessment,
notwithstanding some aspects which, according to the survey, could be improved. In
addition, the majority of users stated that the UDC should enable more garden spaces
for the university community (79%). Also the majority (85%) considered that the
size of the plots is sufﬁcient, while 15% considered it insufﬁcient. More than half of
the users frequently cultivated a variety of eight vegetables, reaching more than 25
different species as a whole.
Currently, the amount of compost produced is sufﬁcient to cover all the needs
of this urban vegetable garden. In terms of chemical composition, the compost has
an excellent quality, generally Class A in the content of heavy metals, thus compat-
ible with the requirements of the organic agriculture regulations. The quality of the
compost was rated as good-very good by the users (65%) or fair (31%), and only
4–6% of the users declared that it seemed bad. Compost is offered stabilized but
unreﬁned. In this sense, 56% of users considered it convenient to pre-screen the
compost, to remove bones, shells and other coarse particles.
The research work played a key role in the implementation and consolidation of
the composting program at the UDC. The beginning of the program was formulated
as part of a doctoral thesis (Vázquez 2015), which included the development of
different technologies to apply in decentralized composting based on the amount of
organic waste to be treated (Vázquez et al. 2015, 2020). Research in this ﬁeld is still
ongoing, both to achieve better product sanitation (Torrijos et al. 2021) and to expand
the application of decentralized composting not only to kitchen waste but also to the
organic fraction collected separately in general areas of university centers (Torrijos
and Soto 2022; Torrijos et al. 2023). This organic waste stream usually includes a
greater amount of inappropriate substances that can affect the quality of the compost.
3.2.6
Bicycle Loan and Sustainable Mobility
The use of bicycles as a mean of transport and travel reduces trafﬁc congestion,
improves environmental quality in cities, contributes to reducing greenhouse gas
emissions, and improves the health of the people who use them. In this way, the
objective of this program launched in 2008 is to promote the use of the bicycle as a
vehicle for sustainable mobility, facilitating access to a bicycle for those interested
in using it to travel to university centers. The loan is aimed at the entire university
community, students and staff, even though students are the main users. The loan
service at the UDC is designed as a transfer of use for an entire academic year,
promoting the incorporation of this means of transport to people who previously
did not use the bicycle. With a very low cost for users, the program favors the
empowerment and consolidation of people as future cycle users (Fig. 6(1)).
People interested in borrowing a bicycle have the option of choosing between
two sizes of bicycle, and recently, since the 2021/2022 school year, also folding
and electric bicycles. Currently, the service has a ﬂeet of 115 bicycles, which are
accompanied by all the mandatory and safety accessories. In addition, the service is
392
V. Torrijos et al.
completed with training activities on basic rules of safe circulation, ergonomics and
basic bicycle maintenance. In the OMA-UDC “Bicycles” web section, the best routes
to access the different campuses by bicycle are published in online map format.
At the end of each loan period, cycle users make an overall assessment of the
service. This assessment obtained for the period 2016–2022 the average score of
4.36 points out of 5. This evaluation also conﬁrms that the bicycle loan service is an
effective instrument to increase the number of users of this means of transport within
the university community. The users are mainly students who change to an address
during the course other than the family address. The results of this analysis indicate
that the users estimated the possibility of obtaining a bicycle easily and at low cost
as a good opportunity to check the effectiveness of this means of transport and also
measure the real use they could make of it during the academic year. Although there
are still conﬂicting points on the bike path to get from the city to the main campus,
the number of people who used the bike every day to get to the UDC has gradually
increased in recent years. The training in terms of circulation rules, ergonomics and
maintenance of the bicycle was perceived as an element of great importance, given
that the percentage of people on the loan who are new bicycle users is considerable.
The city of A Coruña is making progress in the implementation of the bicycle
in the urban area, creating a well-conditioned network of cycle lanes and spaces
enabled for safe parking. These improvements will strengthen the potential for more
sustainable mobility between university centers and the city in the future.
The OMA-Emapic model of the mobility ecological footprint calculator (see
Sect. 3.2.3) was adapted for its speciﬁc application to the displacements of the univer-
sity community because of their university activities. This tool is now standardized
for the calculation of this component of the global ecological footprint of the univer-
sity. That component is of great importance, because the resulting CO2 emissions are
higher than those derived from energy use at the university, contributing to approxi-
mately half of the total ecological footprint (Perez-Lopez et al. 2021). The use of this
tool in recent years has made it possible to investigate both the effect of the COVID-19
pandemic and the reduction of collective public transport prices on people’s modes
of travel (UDC 2023). At ﬁrst, and during the 2021–2022 academic year, COVID-19
reduced travel by the university community but increased the use of private vehicles.
This last trend changed in the opposite direction in the autumn of 2022 due to the
effect of the reduction in the price of public transport for periodic trips. This reduc-
tion was ﬁnanced in Spain by the governments with public funds and in some cases
reached total gratuity.
3.2.7
Scholarship Program and Environmental Volunteering
Several details of the scholarships program at UDC are given in Sect. 2.3. In addition
to the 4 scholarships offered at OMA-UDC for science, engineering and communica-
tion students, each Green Campus center has at least one scholarship student selected
from among the students of the degrees implemented in the respective center. This
reaches a total of 20 places, of which a maximum of 17 have been ﬁlled (Table 5).
The Role of the Ofﬁce for the Environment at the University of a Coruña …
393
This makes it possible to create a transversal and interdisciplinary network of action
and training.
Coordinated by the OMA-UDC, scholarship students participate in general
sustainability activities, particularly in all those related to education for sustain-
ability, dissemination and communication, and the monitoring of the various sectoral
programs (water, waste, composting, biodiversity…). For this, weekly or fortnightly
coordination meetings are held, either in person or online, with the participation of
OMA-UDC staff and several or all scholarship students. Their participation is not
limited to assistance and participation in the activities, but includes participation in
programming, management and their evaluation. At the end of the academic year,
scholarship students complete an assessment survey, which obtained an average score
of 4.37 out of 5 (n = 66) for the period 2017–2022.
The university community of the UDC can choose two ways of involvement
in environmental volunteering: (1) participating in speciﬁc days, usually of 2–3 h
duration, generally these are ﬁeld activities with varied themes (biodiversity, mapping
environmental issues, water audits, waste…), (2) taking a stable commitment for the
academic year, usually involving 1–3 h per week. In the latter case, the volunteer
receives speciﬁc initial training to carry out the actions autonomously, albeit with
periodic expert supervision.
The environmental volunteering of the UDC is managed by the OMA, following
the rules of the Ofﬁce of Cooperation and Volunteering that manages general
volunteering in social matters. The UDC recognizes the involvement of students
in these environmental volunteer actions, being included in Annex II, point 8 of
the regulations on recognition of credits for undergraduate students (UDC 2022f)
(Fig. 6(6)).
3.2.8
Green Campus Program
The Green Campus (GC) program is based on participatory and common methodolo-
gies at an international level, deﬁned by the Foundation for Environmental Education,
and speciﬁed for Spain by the Environmental and Consumer Education Association
(ADEAC). These entities act as external auditors, so that Green Campus can be
assimilated to an environmental management system. The methodology includes
the creation of an Environmental Committee, the realization of an Eco-audit and
the preparation of an Action Plan (Ares-Pernas et al. 2020). The positive audit by
ADEAC grants the green ﬂag to the center (Fig. 6(5)), and certiﬁes the confor-
mity of the program developed. The program is under continuous supervision and,
under ordinary conditions, is renewed every two years. The university community
is sought to participate in the identiﬁcation, prevention and provision of solutions to
sustainability problems.
The GC program began to be applied at the UDC from 2014, gradually incor-
porating various centers, and now reaching all the teaching centers of the UDC,
although with different levels of intensity and consolidation. This application of the
program at the center level, or grouping of centers by campus area, instead of a
394
V. Torrijos et al.
Table 5 Participation in the main thematic lines of activity of the OMA-UDC and Green-Campus during the last 12 years
2010/11 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15 2015/16 2016/17 2017/18 2018/19 2019/20 2020/21 2021/22
Monte da Fraga
55
73
43
108
52
100
93
128
175
237
261
240
Education for sustainability
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
968
1975
2084
1253
2768
OMA-Emapic calculators
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
680
496
527
476
796
Sostauga project and Ríos project
120
85
68
38
48
30
31
214
213
317
146
158
Composting and urban gardens
88
63
110
114
54
55
68
212
259
149
130
73
Bicycle loan
132
125
115
101
110
100
105
100
82
65
65
74
Scholarship students
10
10
11
10
12
10
12
11
11
13
17
14
European week for waste reduction –
-
–
–
–
–
–
–
130
390
625
945
Green Campus Program
–
–
–
85
85
112
176
186
204
214
214
224
TOTAL
405
356
347
376
281
303
321
2326
3354
3796
2987
5083
The Role of the Ofﬁce for the Environment at the University of a Coruña …
395
single program for the whole university, is a distinctive element of GC at UDC and
guarantees grassroots participation and gives it a strong bottom-up character. Thus,
it contrasts with other centralized or top-down approaches. The OMA-UDC acts as a
link between the different GC programs and for coordination with external agents, in
particular ADEAC. The GC program has already incorporated all the student training
centers and part of the administrative and research centers (Fig. 7). Currently, it has
15 green ﬂags (positive evaluations) covering 28 buildings of the University of A
Coruña.
The evolution of the Green Campus program at UDC was analyzed in a recent
study, which paid attention to the difﬁculties and shortcomings identiﬁed and
proposed solutions (Dono et al. 2023). Being one of the few scientiﬁc reports on the
FEE Eco Campus, the study highlighted the insufﬁcient knowledge of the program
on the part of the students of the UDC and identiﬁed their involvement as one of
the main challenges. The participation of members of the university community in
the Green Campus program is fundamentally voluntary, and greater recognition is
needed. However, the program received a good overall rating from participating staff
and students.
5
8
11
12
13
14
15
2
3
5
5
7
8
5
8
16
17
20
21
22
0
5
10
15
20
25
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
GC programs,  centers and Green Flags (Nº)
Year
Eco Campus at UDC
GC programs (nº)
Green Flags (nº)
Teaching centers (nº)
Fig. 7 Temporal evolution of the number of Green Campus programs, incorporated study centers
and green ﬂags awarded
396
V. Torrijos et al.
3.3
Indicators of Participation in Sustainability Actions
at UDC
The participation data over the years of the university community in the main sustain-
ability actions coordinated by the OMA-UDC are shown in Table 5. The ﬁgures indi-
cate the number of people-action participants, so they are not necessarily different
people; moreover, the time of each action can be very variable, depending on its
nature and duration. Even so, the ﬁgures indicate a notable increase in participation
in these topics, which roughly multiplied by a factor of 10 over the last decade.
It is estimated that, currently, between 15 and 20% of the university community
participates directly in one of these sustainability programs and actions.
The number of participants was obtained from the review of the activity reports
of the different years. Until 2016, the records are partial, so the ﬁgures are indicative.
3.4
Some Indicators of UDC’s Environmental Performance
Regardingtheconsumptionofmaterialsandgenerationofwaste,verypositiveﬁgures
were recorded in this period from 2010 to 2021, with a reduction of 39% in total waste
generated, an increase from 40 to 70% of separate collection at source. In addition, a
reduction of 84% in the consumption of paper was recorded in reprographic services,
due in large part to recent social and technological changes. These are absolute
ﬁgures, for a period in which the university community has also shrunk by 20%
in size. An improvement in the efﬁcient use of water was also recorded, with a
39% reduction in total consumption, representing a 23% reduction in per capita
consumption.
However, the ﬁgures for energy use are not so good. Total electricity consumption
fell by 13%, while per capita consumption increased by 9%. Consumption of heating
fuels increased in absolute terms (22%) and per capita (53%). This led to a maintained
consumption of total energy (+0.2%) in the period, as well as an appreciable increase
in total energy consumption per capita (+26%). Although net reductions in total
energy consumption were recorded in 2020 as a result of the successive periods of
quarantine due to COVID-19, the increase recorded in recent years can be explained
by ventilation measures to reduce the presence of radon gas in buildings and to
improve conditions against COVID-19. The reduction in the intensity of use of the
facilities due to the reduction in the number of students also explains the increase in
per capita consumption rates.
The area in which the greatest difﬁculties were encountered for improvement was
the transport of the university community to the study and work centers. Mobility
is dominated by the use of private cars, both among staff and among students. The
modest advances recorded over the years have been cut short by the response to
COVID-19 which has led to greater adherence to the private car. In this way, more
than 50% of the total carbon footprint of the UDC is due to the transportation of
The Role of the Ofﬁce for the Environment at the University of a Coruña …
397
people, despite the recent improvements following the reduction in public transport
prices, as already indicated.
Finally, since the ﬁrst participation in 2016, the UDC has improved positions in
each call of the Green Metric International Ranking, appearing in 2021 as the 49th
most sustainable university in the world and the 4th among the Spanish universities
(UDC 2022e).
4
Further Remarks and Conclusions
HEIs must play a key role in achieving the United Nations SDGs for 2030, due to their
contribution to governance, education, research, outreach and their responsibility in
campus operations (Gonçalves Seraﬁni et al. 2022; Elmassah et al. 2022). However, it
has been argued that the contribution of HEIs should not be measured in terms of mere
scientiﬁc and knowledge production, but rather in terms of their ability to address
major local challenges through collaboration, civic engagement and dissemination
(Cottafava et al. 2022). That is, they must be main agents in the local change towards
a more sustainable development. It is for this goal that the combination of research
and action for sustainability manifests its great potential. Thus, the OMA-UDC’s
sustainability approach incorporated both the objective of active participation of the
university community, through learning by doing and service learning activities, as
well as action research methodologies to deﬁne and improve actions and their results.
The OMA-UDC has developed intense work for the implementation of sustain-
ability initiatives on UDC campuses and centers, and to raise awareness among
students and staff on sustainability issues. Currently, the OMA-UDC’s permanent
programs are education for sustainability, management of campus forest areas and
biodiversity, urban gardens, on-site composting systems for organic canteen waste,
waste prevention and separate collection, eco-audits for water saving, bicycle loan,
ecological footprint calculation and environmental volunteering coordination. With
regard to the structure and working methods, participation is a key aspect, which the
UDC has been promoting through programs such as the network of environmental
scholarship students and the Eco Campus program which involves the creation of
environmental committees in all centers. The work developed by the OMA-UDC is
complemented to a large extent by other parts of the UDC’s sustainability and social
responsibility management structure, which deal with issues such as health, gender
equality, inclusiveness, volunteering or cooperation.
Action research and learning by doing methodologies were applied, in partic-
ular, to the promotion of the selective collection of waste in centers, to the on-site
composting of organic waste from campus canteens and the use of compost in the
fertilization of urban vegetable gardens, to awareness, prevention and efﬁciency in
the use of water, to the calculation and analysis of the ecological footprint through the
development of own calculators adapted to local reality, to the activation and partic-
ipation in the international Green Campus program, as well as to the general educa-
tion programs for sustainability. These experiences, published in different research
398
V. Torrijos et al.
articles elsewhere, can serve as an example and motivation for other universities
and HEIs. The correct management and recycling of waste is a ﬁrst step towards a
more circular economy, but it is not enough. On the way to greater circularity, new
needs arise, such as the research and implementation of sharing, exchange and repair
models and services. There is also a need to explore new ways to move forward in
reducing emissions through greater individual and collective commitment to miti-
gating climate change. They are also new opportunities for the UDC to maintain and
strengthen its role as a leader of sustainability at the local level.
This sustainability approach at UDC has a marked bottom-up character, charac-
terized by the voluntary action of many of the agents, such as the people active in
the Green Campus program. Its consolidation and maintenance in the medium and
long term requires greater institutionalization as well as solutions to the difﬁculties
of participation and lack of means that have been highlighted in the analysis of some
of the ﬁelds of action.
References
ADEGA (2005) Rivers Project website. https://proxectorios.org/. Accessed 27 Jul 2022
Adomßent M, Grahl A, Spira F (2019) Putting sustainable campuses into force: empowering
students, staff and academics by the self-efﬁcacy Green Ofﬁce Model. Int J Sustain High Educ
20(3):470–481. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-02-2019-0072
Amaral LP, Martins N, Gouveia JB (2015) Quest for a sustainable university: a review. Int J Sustain
High Educ 16, 155–172. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-02-2013-0017
Ares-Pernas A, Carvajal CC, Gomis Rodríguez A, Fernández Ibáñez MI, Díaz Casás V, Zaragoza
Fernández MS, Bouza Fernández MS, Santos Pita MDP, García Allut AD, Comesaña Pérez
MP, Caínzos López MJ, Feal Cabezón B, Torres Miño A (2020) Towards a sustainable campus:
working together to achieve the green campus ﬂag on the UDC peripheral campus of Ferrol. Int
J Sustain High Educ 21(7):1367–1390. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-02-2020-0056
Bautista-Puig N, Sanz-Casado E (2021) Sustainability practices in Spanish higher education insti-
tutions: an overview of status and implementation. J Clean Prod 295:126320. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jclepro.2021.126320
Bugallo-Rodríguez A, Vega-Marcote P (2020) Circular economy, sustainability and teacher training
in a higher education institution. Int J Sustain High Educ 21(7):1351–1366. https://doi.org/10.
1108/IJSHE-02-2020-0049
Carballeira T, Cagiao J, Soto M (2011) Evaluación de recursos hídricos y tratamiento de aguas
residuales en el Campus de la Universidad de A Coruña. Revista Internacional de sostenibilidad,
tecnología y humanismo, 2011, Núm 6. https://raco.cat/index.php/RevistaSostenibilidad/article/
view/254266
Carballeira T, Ruiz I, Soto M (2021) Improving the performance of vertical ﬂow constructed
wetlands by modifying the ﬁltering media structure. Environ Sci Pollut Res 28:56852–56864.
https://doi.org/10.1007/S11356-021-14389-1
Cebrián G, Grace M, Humphris D et al (2015) An action research project for embedding education
for sustainable development in a university curriculum: processes and prospects. In: Filho L
(ed) Integrative approaches to sustainable development at University level. World sustainability
series. Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-10690-8_48
Cicek JS, Ingram S, Friesen M, Ruth D (2019) Action research: a methodology for transformative
learning for a professor and his students in an engineering classroom. Eur J Eng Educ 44(1–
2):49–70. https://doi.org/10.1080/03043797.2017.1405242
The Role of the Ofﬁce for the Environment at the University of a Coruña …
399
Cottafava D, Ascione GS, Corazza L, Dhir A (2022) Sustainable development goals research
in higher education institutions: an interdisciplinarity assessment through an entropy-based
indicator. J Bus Res 151:138–155. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2022.06.050
Dono M, Torrijos V, Soto M (2023) Evaluation of the green campus program at the University of
A Coruña. J Sustain Perspect 0:314–327. https://doi.org/10.14710/jsp.2023.20839
Elmassah S, Biltagy M, Gamal D (2022) Framing the role of higher education in sustainable
development: a case study analysis. Int J Sustain High Educ 23(2):320–355. https://doi.org/10.
1108/IJSHE-05-2020-0164
FEE (2022) About FEE Eco Campus. https://www.ecoschools.global/ecocampus-about. Accessed
28 July 2022
Filho W, Will M, Salvia A, Adomßent M, Grahl A, Spira F (2019) The role of green and sustainability
ofﬁcesinfosteringsustainabilityeffortsathighereducationinstitutions.JCleanProd232.https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.05.273
Gonçalves P, Morais de Moura J, Rodrigues de Almeida M, Dantas de JF (2022) Sustainable
development goals in higher education institutions: a systematic literature review. J Clean Prod
370:133473. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.133473
IPCC (2022) Intergovernmental panel of climate change, IPCC. [Masson-Delmotte V, Zhai P, Pirani
A, Connors SL, Péan C, Berger S, Caud N, Chen Y, Goldfarb L, Gomis MI, Huang M, Leitzell
K, Lonnoy E, Matthews JBR., Maycock TK, Waterﬁeld T, Yelekçi O, Yu R., Zhou B] (2021).
Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate change 2021: the physical science basis. Contribution
of working Group I to the sixth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate
change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp 3−32.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009157896.001
Lage B, Anta J, Suárez J, Soto M (2019) SUDS-CAMPUS: implementation of sustainable drainage
systems at the University of A Coruña. Symposium accelerating the implementation of sustain-
able development in campus activities and programmes. organized by: European school of
sustainability science and research (ESSSR), International Sustainable Development Research
Programme and University of A Coruña (Spain), Coruña, 02–03 Dec 2021
Martínez-Buján R, Santiago Gómez E, Diz C, Cortes-Vazquez J, Pérez M (2020) Campus greening
from social sciences: emerging formulas on social responsibility and teaching innovation. Int J
Sustain High Educ 21(7):1545–1561. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-04-2020-0134
Perez-Lopez JB, Orro A, Novales M (2021) Environmental impact of mobility in higher-education
institutions: the case of the ecological footprint at the University of A Coruña (Spain).
Sustainability 13:6190. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13116190
Pérez-Montero A (2020). Green Campus: Educación Ambiental. Int Multidiscip J CREA 1(1).
https://doi.org/10.35869/ijmc.v1i1.2843
Ryan-Fogarty Y, O’Carroll D, O’Mahony MJ, O’Regan B (2016) Development of the green-campus
programme in Ireland: ensuring continuity of environmental education and action for sustain-
able development throughout the Irish education system. Teaching education for sustainable
development at University level, world sustainability series. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
32928-4_19
Salvioni, D.M., Franzoni, S., Cassano, R. (2017) Sustainability in the higher education system:
an opportunity to improve quality and image. Sustainability 9(914). https://doi.org/10.3390/su9
060914
Sánchez M, Ruiz I, Soto M (2023) Sustainable wastewater treatment using a new combined hybrid
digester—constructed wetland system. J Environ Chem Eng 11:110861. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jece.2023.110861
Servia MJ, Cao A, Lueje YR (2020) Back and forth to the campus: tackling invasions through
service-learning activities in higher education. Int J Sustain High Educ 21(7):1413–1427. https://
doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-02-2020-0059
Soto M, Varela FA (2018) UDC residuo cero. Calculadora online da pegada ecolóxica. In: de la
Torre Fernández (ed) Contextos universitarios transformadores: retos e ideas innovadoras. II
400
V. Torrijos et al.
Xornadas de Innovación Docente. Cuﬁe. Universidade da Coruña, pp 207–224. https://doi.org/
10.17979/spudc.9788497496787.207
Torrijos V, Soto M, Calvo D (2020) SOSTAUGA project: reduction of water consumption and
evaluation of potential uses for endogenous resources. Int J Sustain High Educ 21(7):1391–1411.
https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-02-2020-0057
Torrijos V, Calvo D, Soto M (2021) Integration of food waste composting and vegetable gardens in
a university campus. J Clean Prod 315:128175. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.128175
Torrijos V, Soto M (2022) Waste generation and management at the University of A Coruña. In:
Leal Filho W, Azul AM, Doni F, Salvia AL (eds) Handbook of sustainability science in the
future. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-68074-9_119-1
Torrijos V, Dono M, Soto M (2023) Separate collection of bio-waste in general areas of University
Centers. J Sustain Perspect 0:490–498. https://doi.org/10.14710/jsp.2023.20849
UDC (2011) Guía para a Sustentabilidade Ambiental na UDC (Guide to Environmental Sustain-
ability at the UDC). https://www.udc.es/export/sites/udc/sociedade/medio_ambiente/_galeria_
down/pegada_ecoloxica/Guia-para-a-sustentabilidade-ambiental-na-UDC-red.pdf_206306
9239.pdf. Accessed 24 Sept 2022
UDC (2013) Strategic Plan of the UDC 2013–2020. https://www.udc.es/gl/goberno/equipo_reitoral/
vepes/planificacion_estratexica/. Accessed 24 Sept 2022
UDC (2022a) Location of UDC centers at A Coruña and Ferrol Campus and sites. https://www.
udc.es/es/sobreUDC/localizacion/. Accessed 27 Jul 2022
UDC (2022b) UDC facts 2021/2022. https://www.udc.es/export/sites/udc/cifras/_galeria_down/
memorias/memoria2021/1.pdf_2063069294.pdf. Accessed 27 Jul 2022
UDC (2022c) Statutes of the University of A Coruña. https://www.udc.es/export/sites/udc/normat
iva/_galeria_down/xeral/estatutos_vr.pdf_2063069239.pdf. Accessed 27 Jul 2022
UDC (2022d) Historical review Esteiro Ferrol campus. https://www.udc.es/en/sobreUDC/localizac
ion/ferrol/esteiro/resena_historica/. Accessed 27 Jul 2022
UDC (2022e) UI Green Metric World University Ranking. Fact ﬁle 2021. https://www.udc.es/exp
ort/sites/udc/sociedade/medio_ambiente/_galeria_down/pegada_ecoloxica/udc_es_factﬁle_
2021_full.pdf_2063069239.pdf. Accessed 27 Jul 2022
UDC (2022f) Rector’s Resolution of 02/17/2022 establishing the activities for which credits
are recognized in Degree studies, for participation in university cultural, sports, student
representation, solidarity and cooperation activities. Annex I, point 8: Recognition of credits
for training activities in Education for Sustainability programs). Annex II, point 8: Volunteer,
cooperation and internationalization activities organized by the Ofﬁce of Cooperation and
Volunteering. https://sede.udc.gal/services/electronic_board/EXP2022/001464/document?log
icalId=73b4bdaf-0f04-400c-a302-6b797bd9fa09&documentCsv=7B0SUOKUO921R7LB2E
UBBII6. Accessed 27 Jul 2022
UDC (2023) A Pegada Ecolóxica na Universidade da Coruña. Estudo da pegada ecolóxica (PE)
dos desprazamentos e viaxes na UDC (The Ecological Footprint at the University of A Coruña.
Study of the ecological footprint (EF) of displacements and trips in the UDC). https://www.udc.
es/gl/sociedade/medio_ambiente/pegada_ecoloxica/. Accessed 21 Dec 2023
Varela-García FA, Torrijos V, López-Fernández J, Calvo-Dopico DJ, Soto M (2022) Geospatial
ecological footprint calculators through participatory and collective processes. In: Leal Filho
W, Azul AM, Doni F, Salvia AL (eds) Handbook of sustainability science in the future. Springer,
Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-68074-9_129-1
Vázquez MA (2015) Compostaxe descentralizada de residuos orgánicos : do ámbito doméstico á
granxa. PhD University of A Coruña. http://hdl.handle.net/2183/16053
Vázquez MA, Sen R, Soto M (2015) Physico-chemical and biological characteristics of compost
from decentralised composting programmes. Bioresour Technol 198:520–532. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.biortech.2015.09.034
Vázquez MA, Plana R, Pérez C, Soto M (2020) Development of technologies for local composting
of food waste from Universities. Int J Environ Res Public Health 17:3153. https://doi.org/10.
3390/ijerph17093153
Research and Educational Opportunities
Powering Sustainable Development: The
Critical Role of Energy Research
Aliaksandr Novikau
Abstract Energy is a critical component of sustainable development, and energy
research is essential to achieve the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), including SDG 7, “Affordable and clean energy.” Energy is also vital
for achieving other SDGs due to its strong links to human health and well-being,
economic growth, environmental sustainability, and social development. Nonethe-
less, current energy systems are rarely sustainable, primarily because they rely on
fossil fuels. Hence, there is a pressing need for research to develop sustainable energy
solutions. This chapter highlights two essential aspects of energy’s role in sustainable
development research. First, research should concentrate on making energy more
sustainable, emphasizing the need for a green energy transition. Second, research
should focus on the relationship between energy and other SDGs, speciﬁcally how
sustainable energy can contribute to achieving them. The paper discusses the signif-
icance of sustainable energy solutions, such as wind, solar, hydro, and biomass, as
well as the crucial role of energy efﬁciency in reducing energy consumption. Addi-
tionally, the chapter explores the link between energy and poverty, education, gender
equality, and health, emphasizing how sustainable energy can help achieve these
SDGs. The chapter also stresses the need for international cooperation to achieve
SDGs.
Keywords SDG7 · Energy · Energy poverty · Sustainable development
1
Introduction
Energy is an indispensable prerequisite for the sustenance and progress of human life.
Like all living organisms, humans need energy to sustain their biological functions,
including metabolism and growth. Fundamentally, any living organism on our planet
can uphold its internal order only by acquiring free energy from the environment
A. Novikau (B)
Department of Political Science and International Relations, International University of Sarajevo,
Hrasnička Cesta 15, 71210 Ilidža, Bosnia and Herzegovina
e-mail: anovikau@ius.edu.ba
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_23
403
404
A. Novikau
through sunlight or nutrients while concurrently releasing an equivalent quantity of
energy back into its surroundings as heat and entropy.
However, unlike other living organisms, humans extensively utilize energy in
other forms. For instance, maintaining thermal comfort is of utmost importance for
survival. The signiﬁcance of ﬁre for the well-being and longevity of early humans
became apparent during colonizing new regions with colder climates (Roebroeks and
Villa 2011; Smil 2017). In recent centuries, thermal comfort research has primarily
focused on addressing the issue of low temperatures. Nevertheless, a signiﬁcant
portion of the global population, numbering in the billions, resides in regions char-
acterized by constant hot outdoor temperatures. Even in Europe, recent heat waves
have demonstrated the necessity of implementing air conditioning systems to alle-
viate the stress caused by elevated temperatures. Therefore, it is imperative to broaden
the scope of thermal comfort research to encompass the challenges posed by high-
temperature environments and develop appropriate strategies for mitigating their
detrimental impacts on human well-being. Similarly, improving lighting conditions
enhances the quality of life, job performance, and safety.
Due to inherent limitations in physical mobility, humans have consistently strived
to explore alternative energy sources for transportation. Throughout history, people
have employed the power of water, wind, and animals for it. Nonetheless, a remark-
able milestone in transportation was reached when people started using engines that
work on coal or oil products. The introduction of the steam engine and its subsequent
implementation in steamships and railways resulted in a revolutionary inﬂuence on
global trade, signiﬁcantly improving the overall standard of living. Consequently,
the invention of the internal combustion engine and the emergence of automobiles
and airplanes enabled travel to previously insurmountable distances. The continuous
advancement of transportation technologies has even pushed the boundaries to the
extent that space travel is now perceived as a realistic and attainable prospect.
Energy positively affects the manufacturing of industrial goods and agricultural
products. Access to reliable and inexpensive energy has enabled industries to power
machinery, equipment, and processes, increasing production rates and improving
product quality. The availability of energy-intensive processes, such as assembly
lines, automation, and precision farming technologies, has reduced labor needs and
enhanced overall productivity.
Energy is crucial for modern communication. Even thousands of years ago,
before the advent of electricity, humans relied on ingenious methods to commu-
nicate across vast distances that required energy, such as using lights and ﬁres. The
progress in electricity made advanced communication possible—ﬁrst telegraph and
telephone, and currently emails, instant messaging, and videotelephony, enabling
instantaneous communication over very long distances. Not surprisingly, energy
has become paramount for development and human security. Without an affordable
energy supply, human development and even life are often threatened.
At the same time, energy use leads to environmental degradation and adversely
impacts human and planetary health (Novikau 2022). Nearly every aspect of energy
use exerts detrimental effects on the environment. The processes involved in fossil
fuel extraction and transportation invariably lead to the contamination of terrestrial
Powering Sustainable Development: The Critical Role of Energy Research
405
and aquatic ecosystems, posing signiﬁcant hazards to all life forms. Crude oil spills
disseminate across vast expanses of land and water, spanning hundreds to thou-
sands of miles and inﬂicting prolonged damage on affected regions, often requiring
decades for complete recovery. The combustion of fossil fuels emits hazardous
substances, including carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, ozone,
lead, and particulate matter, primarily into the atmosphere (EPA 2023). Further-
more, releasing carbon dioxide during fossil fuel combustion contributes to global
climate change, resulting in an average temperature rise of approximately 1.2 °C.
This increasing global temperature has brought many climate change risks, affecting
both natural and human systems. Among these risks are sea-level rise, loss of biodi-
versity, extreme weather events, and the emergence of food and water shortages
(IPCC 2018). Besides fossil fuels, other energy sources, such as nuclear energy,
present their dangers related to the risks associated with the production, usage, and
management of nuclear fuel.
Energy plays a central role in sustainable development due to its positive and
negative effects on human development, health, and the environment. On the one
hand, access to reliable and sustainable energy is essential for human prosperous
and fulﬁlling life and economic, social, and technological progress. On the other
hand, unsustainable energy use can adversely impact the global climate, planetary
health, the sustainable use of natural resources, and overall harmony with nature. In
this regard, the UN envisions a world “where human habitats are safe, resilient, and
sustainable and where there is universal access to affordable, reliable, and sustainable
energy” (United Nations 2015).
Achieving SDGs is facing challenges on a global scale. Speciﬁcally, the achieve-
ment of SDG 7 in developing countries is below 10% (Leal Filho et al. 2023). For
instance, progress in providing universal access to electricity and clean cooking has
slowed, and the share of renewables in the energy mix remains low (United Nations
2023). Despite projected improvements for the three indicators, they are unlikely to
achieve the goals by 2030 (He et al. 2022). Current energy systems are rarely sustain-
able, primarily due to their heavy reliance on fossil fuels. Modern energy systems
exhibitseveraldeﬁningfeatures,includingincreasingenergyconsumption,thedeple-
tion of nonrenewable energy resources, and escalating risks to energy services. Thus,
modern energy systems are fundamentally incongruent with the principles outlined
in SDG 7. The COVID-19 pandemic and the war in Ukraine have further augmented
the complexities surrounding the realization of the UN Agenda 2030 (Elavarasan
et al. 2021; Pereira et al. 2022; Leal Filho et al. 2023; Liu et al. 2023).
The scientiﬁc community holds signiﬁcant potential to play a pivotal role in
bolstering the implementation of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) through
research, development, and sustainable education. However, energy remains among
the least researched SDGs (Salvia et al. 2019).
This paper aims to analyze the importance of energy for achieving SDGs, identify
critical shortcomings of modern energy systems, and propose main directions for
energy research.
406
A. Novikau
Thechapterisstructuredasfollows:ThenextsectionexaminestheUNSustainable
Development Goal 7—“Affordable and clean energy.” Section 3 explores the inter-
connections between SDG 7 and other sustainable development goals. In Sect. 4,
the main directions for energy research are identiﬁed. Section 5 emphasizes the
signiﬁcance of international cooperation in energy research and its contribution to
achieving SDGs. The ﬁnal section concludes and offers some directions for further
research.
2
SDG 7. Affordable and Clean Energy
Energy is critical to sustainable development, and energy research is essential to
achieving the SDGs. Contrasting with the Millennium Development Goals, the
United Nations has explicitly incorporated energy as one of its SDGs–SDG 7,
“Affordable and clean energy” (United Nations 2023). The explicit inclusion of
energy in the SDGs highlights the recognition of its critical role in global sustainable
development. By integrating energy into the SDGs, the United Nations acknowl-
edges its signiﬁcance as a fundamental driver of social and economic progress,
environmental preservation, and improved quality of life worldwide. It underscores
the interconnections between energy, poverty eradication, climate action, economic
growth, and several other dimensions of sustainable development. By incorporating
affordable and clean energy as a target, the international community seeks to foster
a comprehensive approach to addressing energy-related challenges, paving the way
for a more inclusive, resilient, and sustainable future (United Nations 2015).
SDG 7 aims to “Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable, and modern
energy for all.” This goal effectively tackles three critical dimensions of contempo-
rary global energy challenges.
First, it emphasizes the reliability and affordability of energy supply, the aspects
traditionally encompassed within the concept of energy security (Yergin 2006). By
highlighting these dimensions, SDG 7 recognizes the signiﬁcance of securing a
consistent and economically viable energy supply to meet the needs of societies and
ensure their stability and resilience.
Second, SDG 7 addresses the environmental dimension of energy security, a facet
often neglected in earlier deﬁnitions. This dimension acknowledges that achieving
energy security should not come at the expense of detrimental environmental impacts
(APERC 2007).
Third, SDG 7 highlights the importance of addressing the individual dimension of
energy security, called energy poverty. It recognizes that 675 million people do not
have access to electricity, and 2.3 billion still use polluting fuels such as wood, coal,
charcoal, or biomass for heating and cooking (United Nations 2023). It inevitably
hinders their well-being and limits their social and economic development oppor-
tunities. The goal of prioritizing energy access for all is to alleviate energy poverty
and promote inclusive and equitable progress. Although SDG 7 does not explicitly
mention the term “right to energy,” in many respects, it implies that modern and
Powering Sustainable Development: The Critical Role of Energy Research
407
sustainable energy should be viewed as a fundamental right of every human being
(Shyu 2021).
SDG 7 has several crucial targets and indicators to make the goal actionable,
measurable, and achievable. These targets and indicators help track progress, foster
accountability, and guide the decision-making process (United Nations 2015).
Target 7.1. “By 2030, ensure universal access to affordable, reliable and modern
energy services.”
This target has several indicators:
Indicator 7.1.1. “Proportion of population with access to electricity.”
Access to electricity is a good indicator for measuring the extent to which people
and communities have reliable access to clean energy sources. Monitoring this indi-
cator makes it possible to gauge the progress made in expanding electricity access
to unserved or underserved areas, bridging the energy access gap, and ensuring that
a greater proportion of the global population can beneﬁt from the advantages of
electricity.
Indicator 7.1.2. “Proportion of the population with primary reliance on clean fuels and
technology.”
The second indicator of the target demonstrates the importance of moving away
from ineffective and polluting energy sources, such as coal, charcoal, and biomass,
towards cleaner and more sustainable alternatives, such as electric cookstoves, lique-
ﬁed petroleum gas, or renewable energy sources like solar, wind, or hydro. The indi-
cator reﬂects national and international efforts to improve energy efﬁciency, reduce
indoor air pollution, and mitigate global climate change.
Target 7.2. “By 2030, increase the share of renewable energy in the global energy
mix substantially” with only one indicator:
Indicator 7.2.1. “Renewable energy shares in the total ﬁnal energy consumption.”
Tracking the shares of renewable energy in the energy mix makes it possible to
assess the effectiveness of policies aimed at increasing renewable energy deployment.
This indicator also allows comparisons across countries and regions, identifying best
practices and areas for improvement. It also provides a basis for setting targets, devel-
oping renewable energy strategies, and fostering collaboration among governments,
industries, and other stakeholders.
Target 7.3. “By 2030, double the global rate of improvement in energy efﬁciency.”
• Indicator 7.3.1. “Energy intensity measured in terms of primary energy and GDP.”
Measuring energy intensity allows us to evaluate the efﬁciency gains achieved
in different economies (Novikau 2019). By comparing energy consumption trends
with economic performance, it is possible to identify countries that have successfully
decoupled energy use from economic growth, indicating a more efﬁcient use of
energy resources.
408
A. Novikau
Two sub-targets in SDG 7 support and complement the main targets. Their indi-
cators are typically more qualitative and provide additional context and depth to the
primary indicators.
Target 7.a. “By 2030, enhance international cooperation to facilitate access to
clean energy research and technology, including renewable energy, energy efﬁciency,
and advanced and cleaner fossil-fuel technology, and promote investment in energy
infrastructure and clean energy technology.”
• Indicator 7.a.1. “International ﬁnancial ﬂows to developing countries in support
of clean energy research and development and renewable energy production,
including in hybrid systems.”
Target7.b.“By2030,expandinfrastructureandupgradetechnologyforsupplying
modern and sustainable energy services for all in developing countries, in particular,
least developed countries, small island developing states, and land-locked developing
countries, by their respective programs of support.”
• Indicator 7.b.1. “Installed renewable energy-generating capacity in developing
countries (in watts per capita).”
Both sub-indicators highlight the signiﬁcance of international cooperation,
research, technology, investment, and infrastructure development for modern and
clean energy. They emphasize the need for collaborative actions to mobilize resources
and overcome barriers, particularly in developing countries and regions with speciﬁc
energy challenges.
At the same time, some studies demonstrate the existence of negative correlations
within SDG 7. Speciﬁcally, the progress in Indicator 7.1.2. achieved in some, mainly
developing countries, by the expansion of fossil fuels contradicts Indicator 7.2.1
(Pradhan et al. 2017; Khan et al. 2022).
3
Importance of Energy for Other SDGs
One of the core principles of UN SDGs is their integration and indivisibility, which
means that implementing the 2030 Agenda should consider their interlinked nature
(United Nations 2015; Bennich et al. 2020; Castor et al. 2020).
Energy is vital for achieving other SDGs because of its strong links to economic
growth, environmental sustainability, and social development. Essentially, progress
in sustainable energy can accelerate the achievement of every single SDG (Fuso
Nerini et al. 2017; Elavarasan et al. 2022).
Progress towards affordable energy is instrumental in achieving the targets of
SDG1, “No Poverty,” as energy is crucial for economic growth. Available and afford-
able energy can enhance income-earning capabilities, entrepreneurial opportunities,
autonomy, and overall quality of life for billions of people. The lack of access to
energy services or the inability to afford them can be considered one of the various
dimensions of poverty. When an individual has no uninterrupted energy supply or
Powering Sustainable Development: The Critical Role of Energy Research
409
electricity or cannot afford it, it is often called “energy poverty”—the absence of
reliable and affordable energy (Reddy 2015). According to the United Nations,
minimal energy services encompass lighting, space heating or cooling, and cell phone
charging. However, to ensure decent energy services, the provision of refrigerators,
air conditioners, and television sets is necessary (Rao et al. 2019; United Nations
2021). SDG1 encourages social protection systems, measuring them as one of its
targets, and energy subsidies can be regarded as an integral part of such initiatives.
Energy is a crucial component of the so-called “water-energy-food” approach,
which refers to an integrated framework recognizing the interconnectedness between
energy, food, and water systems. This approach acknowledges the interdependencies
and trade-offs among these sectors and emphasizes the need for coordinated and
sustainable management to achieve multiple SDGs (Namany et al. 2019, 2021).
For instance, in relation to SDG 2, “No hunger,” affordable and clean energy
directly impacts food security, reducing hunger and malnutrition. The availability and
accessibility of inexpensive and environmentally friendly energy are vital for every
stage of the food supply chain. The agricultural sector is particularly susceptible to the
impacts of energy price increases, primarily due to its signiﬁcant energy requirements
for irrigation (Bazilian et al. 2011b).
Affordable and clean energy can signiﬁcantly contribute to achieving the targets
set by SDG 3, “Good health and well-being,” which is not surprising given the critical
roleenergyplaysinhumanhealth.Accesstoaffordableenergyhasbroadimplications
for enhancing well-being and fostering sustainable development. First, it enables
people to meet their basic energy needs, such as lighting, cooking, and heating,
improving living conditions, quality of life, and job opportunities, ultimately leading
to poverty reduction and socio-economic empowerment (Novikau 2022). Second,
access to reliable energy is vital for providing essential healthcare services. Without
affordable energy, healthcare facilities simply cannot operate effectively. Reliable
electricity is crucial for powering medical devices, including life-saving equip-
ment, diagnostic tools, and lighting, enhancing healthcare services’ quality. More-
over, affordable and reliable energy access supports implementing digital healthcare
technologies and electronic medical record systems, enabling efﬁcient healthcare
delivery, remote consultations, and timely information management.
Access to modern energy plays a pivotal role in achieving SDG 4, “Quality educa-
tion,” as it enables the integration of modern information technologies in educa-
tional institutions. With a reliable energy supply, schools can harness the power of
computers, the internet, and digital learning platforms, transforming how students
access and engage with educational content. This integration enhances the learning
experience, fosters a deeper understanding of complex subjects, and encourages crit-
ical thinking and problem-solving skills. Moreover, access to modern energy ensures
that schools have quality lighting and thermal comfort. Well-lit classrooms create
a conducive learning environment, reducing eye fatigue and promoting focus and
concentration among students (Dornan 2014; Fuso Nerini et al. 2017).
Progress in SDG 7 can also contribute to SDG 5, “Gender equality,” in several
profound ways. Women are disproportionately affected by energy poverty, especially
in developing countries, where they often bear the burden of collecting biomass for
410
A. Novikau
cooking and heating, which can lead to adverse health effects and time constraints on
other activities. Providing better access to modern cooking solutions and clean energy
alternatives can signiﬁcantly improve women’s health and alleviate the daily struggle
associated with traditional energy sources. Electric lighting can play a transformative
role in enhancing women’s safety and increasing school enrollment among girls
(McCollum et al. 2018; Matano 2022).
Access to modern and clean energy plays a crucial role in advancing SDG 6,
“Clean water and sanitation.” Modern energy sources, such as renewable energy tech-
nologies, offer sustainable solutions for addressing water-related challenges. Energy
is essential for powering water treatment plants, wastewater management, and sani-
tation facilities, making it a critical component in implementing advanced water
treatment and sanitation systems. By ensuring reliable and affordable energy access,
it is possible to enhance the effectiveness and efﬁciency of these systems, leading to
improved water quality, increased access to safe drinking water, and better sanita-
tion practices. Furthermore, modern energy sources enable the adoption of innovative
technologies, such as advanced ﬁltration systems and decentralized wastewater treat-
ment,whichcanfurtherenhancewatertreatmentcapabilitiesandpromotesustainable
water management practices (McCollum et al. 2018). This transformative potential is
crucial for numerous island populations and densely populated regions in the Middle
East and North Africa that heavily rely on desalination. The desalination process
demands a signiﬁcant amount of energy, posing a severe challenge for countries that
cannot guarantee an uninterrupted supply of affordable energy. Given the escalating
demand for water and the pressing need for sustainable approaches, addressing the
energy-intensive nature of desalination becomes imperative. By embracing innova-
tive strategies and transitioning to renewable energy sources, it is possible to effec-
tively tackle the surging energy demands in desalination operations, safeguarding
water security while minimizing the ecological footprint associated with energy
consumption (Bazilian et al. 2011b).
There is a clear link between energy and SDG 8, “Decent work and economic
growth.” Economic growth, productive employment, and decent work for all can only
be achieved with the help of affordable energy. Access to reliable modern energy
services profoundly impacts productivity and earnings. By incorporating renewable
energy sources and energy-efﬁcient technologies, along with targeted monetary and
ﬁscal policies, it is possible to stimulate innovation and reinforce local, regional, and
national industrial and employment objectives (McCollum et al. 2018).
Although the overall employment effects are expected to be positive, uncertainties
persist regarding some groups that could be adversely affected by the transition to
clean energy. Therefore, ensuring a “just transition” refers to worker protection,
decent work, and job quality preservation while striving to meet affordable and
clean energy goals. Such an approach emphasizes social inclusion and addresses the
needs of workers in sectors that might undergo signiﬁcant changes. By implementing
policies that support reskilling and upskilling programs, providing income support,
and fostering an inclusive labor market, the transition to clean energy can be smoother
and more equitable for all stakeholders (Newell and Mulvaney 2013; Kelly et al.
2020).
Powering Sustainable Development: The Critical Role of Energy Research
411
Access to affordable and reliable energy is essential for developing and main-
taining resilient infrastructure, which is the objective of SDG 9, “Industry, innovation,
and infrastructure.” Energy is required to construct, operate, and maintain infrastruc-
ture systems such as transportation networks, power grids, and waste management
facilities. Access to modern energy services can also have a transformative impact on
industrialization, enabling the establishment and growth of industries, particularly
in manufacturing, agriculture, and services.
Energy can potentially contribute to achieving SDG 10, “Reduce inequalities.”
For instance, modern decentralized energy systems can foster a more inclusive and
democratic approach to managing energy resources (Chaurey and Kandpal 2010;
McCollum et al. 2018).
Energy is vital for SDG 11, “Sustainable cities and communities.” Modern essen-
tial services such as water and sewage, heating, transportation, and waste manage-
ment heavily depend on energy. Therefore, implementing modern energy technolo-
gies in public transit and urban densiﬁcation can further advance urban environmental
sustainability by enhancing air quality and decreasing noise (McCollum et al. 2018).
Having affordable and clean energy can help achieve SDG 12, ‘Responsible
consumption and production.’ Modern energy solutions can slow the depletion of
natural resources. While advanced technologies and infrastructure still require vast
amounts of raw materials, increasing recycling rates can improve the energy efﬁ-
ciency of industrial production, thereby reducing the impacts of all supply chain
stages (McCollum et al. 2018; Gunnarsdottir et al. 2021).
Achieving SDG7 is vital in advancing SDG 13, “Climate action.” Indeed, human
activities, speciﬁcally the emissions of greenhouse gases resulting from the combus-
tion of fossil fuels, have been the primary driver behind global climate change.
This escalating warming trend has given rise to many risks associated with climate
change, which pose signiﬁcant threats to natural ecosystems and human societies.
These risks encompass a broad range of impacts, such as rising sea levels, biodi-
versity loss, extreme weather events, and the potential for food and water scarcity
(He et al. 2022). SDG 7 is crucial, though not entirely sufﬁcient, to achieve climate
change goals. Therefore, meeting the renewable energy and energy efﬁciency targets
of SDG7 is a necessary step toward climate change mitigation strategies (Bazilian
et al. 2011a; McCollum et al. 2018).
Achieving SDG 7 can contribute to the achievement of SDG14, “Life below
water.” The global deployment of renewable energy and improvements in energy
efﬁciency can effectively reduce carbon dioxide emissions, consequently slowing the
rates of ocean acidiﬁcation. Moreover, ocean-based energy derived from renewable
sources such as offshore wind farms, wave energy, and tidal power holds signiﬁcant
potential as an energy resource for island nations and countries along coastlines. The
concept of multi-use platforms, integrating renewable energy generation, aquacul-
ture,transportservices,andleisureactivities,furtherhighlightsthesynergiesbetween
SDG 7 and SDG 14 in promoting sustainable practices that support both clean energy
production and the preservation of marine ecosystems (McCollum et al. 2018).
412
A. Novikau
Achieving SDG 7 is connected to SDG 15,”Life on land,” which focuses on the
sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, such as forests, and preventing land degra-
dation. Indeed, by promoting affordable and sustainable energy sources, communi-
ties can leverage electricity to adopt advanced agricultural technologies and prac-
tices that enhance productivity and reduce the reliance on environmentally harmful
approaches. Access to electricity also facilitates the implementation of alternative
energy solutions, curbing the demand for biomass fuels and mitigating deforestation
(Bazilian et al. 2011b).
The achievement of SDG 7 can signiﬁcantly contribute to achieving SDG 16,
“Peace, justice, and strong institutions.” Justice-based approaches have a consider-
able capacity to contribute to energy decision-making. By providing reliable and
affordable energy services, SDG 7 can improve access to information and communi-
cation technologies, which are vital for transparent governance, effective institutions,
and accountable decision-making processes. Reliable energy sources can strengthen
the infrastructure necessary for security and law enforcement, enabling effective
disaster response and ensuring the safety of communities (Sovacool et al. 2014;
Fuso Nerini et al. 2017).
Finally, achieving SDG 7 can contribute to SDG 17, “Partnerships for the
goals.” Access to reliable energy sources is pivotal in enabling effective partner-
ships and collaboration for sustainable development. Energy is essential for powering
communication technologies, facilitating information exchange, and fostering stake-
holder connectivity. Access to modern energy services can enhance communication
networks and improve connectivity, enabling local, national, and international part-
nerships. Moreover, reliable energy sources support the establishment of produc-
tive and sustainable industries, creating opportunities for public–private partnerships
and cross-sector collaborations. Energy access also enables the implementation of
innovative technologies and practices, promoting knowledge-sharing and capacity-
building initiatives among partners. Additionally, achieving SDG 7 encourages ﬁnan-
cial investment in sustainable energy projects, attracting private sector participa-
tion and facilitating collaboration between governmental, business, and civil society
organizations.
4
The Role of Research
As mentioned in the previous sections, the scientiﬁc community holds considerable
potential in bolstering the implementation of SDGs through research and develop-
ment and sustainable education. SDG 7 is not an exception. Energy research for
sustainable development should focus on several directions.
Powering Sustainable Development: The Critical Role of Energy Research
413
4.1
Energy Efﬁciency and Sustainable Energy Consumption
As explicitly stated in Target 7.3, improving energy efﬁciency is a major contributor
to achieving SDG 7. Energy efﬁciency entails the utilization of energy resources
to minimize wastage and decrease energy consumption while upholding the quality
of products or services. This approach aims to conserve energy by achieving the
same output with reduced energy input. Improving energy efﬁciency across sectors
is essential for sustainable development. Research has shown a positive relationship
between sustainable economic development and energy efﬁciency, suggesting that
sustainable economic growth is associated with improved energy efﬁciency.
Similarly, a positive correlation exists between sustainable ﬁnancial development
and energy efﬁciency, indicating that sustainable ﬁnancial practices contribute to
increased energy efﬁciency (Zakari et al. 2022). Energy efﬁciency reduces waste
through technological advancements, efﬁcient practices, and behavior changes.
For instance, energy-efﬁcient appliances, buildings, and transportation systems can
signiﬁcantly reduce energy consumption and environmental impact. To address the
environmental impact of emissions and promote sustainable practices, there is a
growing interest in energy-efﬁcient building design and the phasing out harmful
refrigerants. Buildings account for around 40% of the world’s annual energy
consumption, mainly due to lighting, heating, cooling, and air conditioning require-
ments. These challenges can be effectively addressed by researching energy-efﬁcient
technologies and practices and adopting policies encouraging energy conservation
(Omer 2008).
4.2
Energy Infrastructure
Energy research for sustainable development should also focus on further devel-
oping energy infrastructure. It can involve building infrastructure, upgrading existing
energy systems, and improving the resilience of energy systems to natural disasters.
It is essential for developing countries even though energy infrastructure in devel-
oped countries can be modernized too to meet stricter energy efﬁciency and pollution
requirements too.
4.3
Renewable Energy
One of the most essential strategies for achieving SDG 7 is to increase research in
renewable energy technologies. Numerous studies demonstrate a signiﬁcant positive
correlation between the adoption of renewable energy and sustainable development
observed in developed and developing countries (Güney 2019; Włodarczyk et al.
2021). The ﬁnite nature of fossil fuel resources and their associated geopolitical
414
A. Novikau
tensions make them unreliable energy sources. Investing in sustainable energy tech-
nologies such as wind, solar, and geothermal energy reduces dependence on these
volatile fuel markets and enhances energy security. Renewable energy sources offer
domestic and diverse energy supplies, enabling countries to reduce their vulnerability
to price ﬂuctuations and geopolitical disruptions.
Moreover, a green energy transition brings economic beneﬁts. Thus, research
focused on sustainable energy systems that can drive technological advancements
and innovation, creating new job opportunities and economic growth. The renewable
energy sector has the potential to generate employment across various ﬁelds, from
manufacturing and installation to research and development. By prioritizing sustain-
able energy solutions, nations can foster the growth of a green economy, leading to
long-term economic stability and competitiveness (Østergaard et al. 2020).
4.4
Digitalization
The scholarly literature provides empirical evidence supporting the afﬁrmative corre-
lation between digital transformation and sustainability (Ghobakhloo 2020). This
correlation extends to the digitalization of energy systems, wherein positive impacts
on SDG7 and other interconnected SDGs have been discerned. Digitalization of
energy systems, or integrating computer technologies into them, has sparked a
profound metamorphosis within the realm of energy. This revolutionary advancement
instills newfound stability in energy systems, facilitating the seamless integration of
power generation with end-users. Consequently, it ushers in a reduction in peak
demand, expedites the restoration of energy supply following disruptions, curtails
operating expenses, and signiﬁcantly streamlines the incorporation of renewable
energy sources into existing systems (U.S. Department of Energy 2021). Further-
more, digitalization plays a vital role in enhancing end users’ energy efﬁciency by
offering real-time feedback on energy consumption, often via the employment of
smart meters. Dynamic tariffs, also known as real-time pricing, mold consumption
patterns, particularly during peak hours (Elavarasan et al. 2021).
4.5
Links with Other SDGs
Sustainable development research should focus on the relationship between energy
and other SDGs, highlighting how sustainable energy can simultaneously contribute
to achieving multiple goals. The importance of the interdisciplinary and transdisci-
plinary character of sustainability research has been emphasized in numerous studies
(Leal Filho et al. 2018). Sustainable energy solutions provide access to affordable and
clean energy, promote climate action, support sustainable cities and communities,
foster innovation and economic growth, and protect ecosystems. By recognizing the
interconnectedness of energy with various dimensions of sustainable development,
Powering Sustainable Development: The Critical Role of Energy Research
415
we can develop integrated strategies that propel us toward a more sustainable and
inclusive future.
4.6
Energy Justice
Energy research should focus on increasing international equity by providing modern
energy services to all (Gunnarsdottir et al. 2021). Ensuring universal access to clean
and affordable energy is fundamental to sustainable development. Many regions,
especially in developing countries, still lack access to modern energy services.
Expanding renewable energy infrastructure, microgrids, and off-grid solutions can
provide clean energy access to remote areas, fostering economic development
and improving quality of life. Furthermore, sustainable energy access is crucial
for social development and equity. Many communities, especially in developing
regions, lack access to reliable and affordable energy sources. Sustainable devel-
opment research should concentrate on developing decentralized renewable energy
systems that provide clean and affordable energy to these underserved communi-
ties. Access to energy is fundamental for improving living conditions, supporting
healthcare facilities, enabling education, and promoting economic opportunities.
Thus, expanding access to electricity and modern cooking technologies in poor
communities is essential.
5
The Role of International Cooperation
Achieving sustainable development goals will require global cooperation and coor-
dination (Leal Filho et al. 2022). SDG 7 is not an exception—As mentioned earlier,
Target 7A explicitly orders, “By 2030, enhance international cooperation to facilitate
access to clean energy research and technology.”
First, international cooperation is vital in facilitating access to clean energy
research and technology because a single company or even a nation cannot inde-
pendently develop, produce, and implement modern energy solutions in today’s
globalized world. Thus, collaboration among academia, business, states, and civil
society is crucial.
Second, international cooperation should help transfer modern energy technolo-
gies to developing countries. It can include technology transfer through licensing
agreements or technical support, as well as providing ﬁnancial support, especially
for communities affected by energy poverty. Additionally, the focus should be on
removing barriers to such technology transfer.
Third, international cooperation should focus on creating regulatory policies that
promote energy research for sustainable development. It involves designing targets
416
A. Novikau
and indicators for implementing modern and clean energy solutions for all. Harmo-
nizing standards and policies across countries can enhance access to sustainable
energy for all.
Finally, international capacity-building initiatives related to energy are crucial for
progress in modern energy. Capacity-building initiatives can include training and
technical assistance for individuals and organizations, both public and private.
6
Conclusion
As highlighted throughout this chapter, energy plays a pivotal role in sustainable
development. The urgency to achieve SDG7 urges focused energy research and the
development of sustainable energy solutions. The current state of energy systems,
predominantly reliant on fossil fuels, poses signiﬁcant challenges to sustainability,
underscoring the critical need for a green energy transition. Moreover, the intercon-
nectionsbetweenenergyandotherSDGs,includingeconomicgrowth,environmental
sustainability, social development, poverty eradication, education, gender equality,
and health, emphasize the far-reaching impact of sustainable energy solutions. Inte-
grating solar, wind, hydropower, and energy efﬁciency measures holds immense
potential for addressing these challenges. However, achieving these goals requires
international cooperation and collaboration to facilitate the transition to sustainable
energy systems. By prioritizing research on sustainable energy and recognizing its
multifaceted beneﬁts, we can pave the way for a more prosperous, equitable, and
sustainable future. Efforts towards sustainable energy must continue, with a strong
focus on innovation, policy support, and collective action to realize the vision of a
world powered by affordable and clean energy for all while concurrently achieving
the broader SDGs.
While signiﬁcant progress has been made in understanding the role of energy
in sustainable development, several directions for further research can enrich our
knowledge and inform policymaking. First, additional research is needed to explore
the potential integration of emerging technologies into sustainable energy systems.
It includes investigating advanced storage solutions, smart grids, and decentralized
energy generation to enhance the efﬁciency and reliability of renewable energy
sources. Furthermore, studies focused on the socio-economic implications of sustain-
able energy transitions, particularly in developing regions, are crucial for under-
standing the distributional impacts and identifying strategies to ensure equitable
access to clean energy. Additionally, interdisciplinary research is required to explore
the intricate connections between energy, climate change, and other SDGs, such as
biodiversity conservation and sustainable urbanization.
Moreover, developing comprehensive methodologies to assess the lifecycle envi-
ronmental impacts of different energy sources, including their extraction, manu-
facturing, use, and disposal, is imperative for informed decision-making. Finally,
research should also examine the role of policy frameworks, ﬁnancial mechanisms,
and international collaborations in accelerating the adoption of sustainable energy
Powering Sustainable Development: The Critical Role of Energy Research
417
solutions at scale. By addressing these research directions, we can foster a deeper
understanding of sustainable energy systems and pave the way for transformative
actions toward achieving the SDGs.
References
APERC (Asia Paciﬁc Energy Research Centre) (2007) A quest for energy security in the 21st
century: resources and constraints. Institute of Energy Economics, Japan, Tokyo
Bazilian M, Hobbs BF, Blyth W et al (2011a) Interactions between energy security and climate
change: a focus on developing countries. Energy Policy 39:3750–3756. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.enpol.2011.04.003
Bazilian M, Rogner H, Howells M et al (2011b) Considering the energy, water and food nexus:
towards an integrated modelling approach. Energy Policy 39:7896–7906. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.enpol.2011.09.039
Bennich T, Weitz N, Carlsen H (2020) Deciphering the scientiﬁc literature on SDG interactions:
a review and reading guide. Sci Total Environ 728:138405. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.
2020.138405
Castor J, Bacha K, Fuso Nerini F (2020) SDGs in action: a novel framework for assessing energy
projects against the sustainable development goals. Energy Res Soc Sci 68:101556. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.erss.2020.101556
Chaurey A, Kandpal TC (2010) Assessment and evaluation of PV based decentralized rural electri-
ﬁcation: an overview. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 14:2266–2278. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.
2010.04.005
Dornan M (2014) Access to electricity in Small Island Developing States of the Paciﬁc: issues and
challenges. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 31:726–735. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2013.12.037
Elavarasan RM, Pugazhendhi R, Irfan M et al (2022) A novel Sustainable Development Goal
7 composite index as the paradigm for energy sustainability assessment: a case study from
Europe. Appl Energy 307:118173. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.118173
Elavarasan RM, Pugazhendhi R, Jamal T et al (2021) Envisioning the UN Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) through the lens of energy sustainability (SDG 7) in the post-COVID-19 world.
Appl Energy 292:116665. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.116665
EPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency) (2023) Criteria air pollutants. https://www.
epa.gov/criteria-air-pollutants. Accessed 6 Aug 2023
Fuso Nerini F, Tomei J, To LS et al (2017) Mapping synergies and trade-offs between energy and
the Sustainable Development Goals. Nat Energy 3:10–15. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-017-
0036-5
Ghobakhloo M (2020) Industry 4.0, digitization, and opportunities for sustainability. J Clean Prod
252:119869. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.119869
Güney T (2019) Renewable energy, non-renewable energy and sustainable development. Int J
Sustain Dev World Ecol 26:389–397. https://doi.org/10.1080/13504509.2019.1595214
Gunnarsdottir I, Davidsdottir B, Worrell E, Sigurgeirsdottir S (2021) Sustainable energy develop-
ment: History of the concept and emerging themes. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 141:110770.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2021.110770
He J, Yang Y, Liao Z et al (2022) Linking SDG 7 to assess the renewable energy footprint of nations
by 2030. Appl Energy 317:119167. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2022.119167
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change) (2018) Global Warming of 1.5 C: IPCC special
report on impacts of global warming of 1.5 C above pre-industrial levels in context of strength-
ening response to climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty.
Cambridge University Press
418
A. Novikau
Kelly JA, Clinch JP, Kelleher L, Shahab S (2020) Enabling a just transition: a composite indicator for
assessing home-heating energy-poverty risk and the impact of environmental policy measures.
Energy Policy 146:111791. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2020.111791
Khan S, Yahong W, Zeeshan A (2022) Impact of poverty and income inequality on the ecological
footprint in Asian developing economies: assessment of sustainable development goals. Energy
Rep 8:670–679. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egyr.2021.12.001
Leal Filho W, Azeiteiro U, Alves F et al (2018) Reinvigorating the sustainable development research
agenda: the role of the sustainable development goals (SDG). Int J Sustain Dev World Ecol
25:131–142. https://doi.org/10.1080/13504509.2017.1342103
Leal Filho W, Vasconcelos CRP, Dinis MAP, Viera Trevisan L (2022) Empty promises: why declara-
tions and international cooperation on sustainable development often fail to deliver. Int J Sustain
Dev World Ecol 29:850–857. https://doi.org/10.1080/13504509.2022.2107108
Leal Filho W, Viera Trevisan L, Simon Rampasso I et al (2023) When the alarm bells ring: why
the UN sustainable development goals may not be achieved by 2030. J Clean Prod 407:137108.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2023.137108
Liu W, Chen X, Zhang J (2023) The Russia-Ukraine conﬂict and the automotive energy transition:
empirical evidence from China. Energy 128562. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2023.128562
Matano H (2022) Clean energy for women, by women. In: World Bank Blogs. https://blogs.worldb
ank.org/voices/clean-energy-women-women. Accessed 22 Jun 2023
McCollum DL, Echeverri LG, Busch S et al (2018) Connecting the sustainable development goals
by their energy inter-linkages. Environ Res Lett 13:033006. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/
aaafe3
Namany S, Al-Ansari T, Govindan R (2019) Sustainable energy, water and food nexus systems: a
focused review of decision-making tools for efﬁcient resource management and governance. J
Clean Prod 225:610–626. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.03.304
Namany S, Govindan R, Martino MD et al (2021) An Energy-Water-Food nexus-based decision-
making framework to guide national priorities in Qatar. Sustain Cities Soc 75:103342. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2021.103342
Newell P, Mulvaney D (2013) The political economy of the ‘just transition’: the political economy
of the ‘just transition.’ Geogr J 179:132–140. https://doi.org/10.1111/geoj.12008
Novikau A (2022) Energy, and human and planetary health: Is the mutual link inevitable? In: Leal
Filho W (ed) Handbook of human and planetary health. Springer, Cham, pp 101–112
Novikau A (2019) Conceptualizing and achieving energy security: the case of Belarus. Energy
Strategy Rev 26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esr.2019.100408
Omer AM (2008) Energy, environment and sustainable development. Renew Sustain Energy Rev
12:2265–2300. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2007.05.001
Østergaard PA, Duic N, Noorollahi Y et al (2020) Sustainable development using renewable energy
technology. Renew Energy 146:2430–2437. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2019.08.094
Pereira P, Zhao W, Symochko L et al (2022) The Russian-Ukrainian armed conﬂict will push back
the sustainable development goals. Geogr Sustain 3:277–287. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geosus.
2022.09.003
Pradhan P, Costa L, Rybski D et al (2017) A systematic study of Sustainable Development Goal
(SDG) interactions. Earths Future 5:1169–1179. https://doi.org/10.1002/2017EF000632
Rao ND, Min J, Mastrucci A (2019) Energy requirements for decent living in India, Brazil and
South Africa. Nat Energy 4:1025–1032. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-019-0497-9
Reddy AKN (2015) Energy and social issues. In: World energy assessment: energy and the challenge
of sustainability. United Nations Development Programme, pp 39–60
Roebroeks W, Villa P (2011) On the earliest evidence for habitual use of ﬁre in Europe. Proc Natl
Acad Sci 108:5209–5214. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1018116108
Salvia AL, Leal Filho W, Brandli LL, Griebeler JS (2019) Assessing research trends related to
Sustainable Development Goals: local and global issues. J Clean Prod 208:841–849. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.09.242
Powering Sustainable Development: The Critical Role of Energy Research
419
Shyu C-W (2021) A framework for ‘right to energy’ to meet UN SDG7: Policy implications to
meet basic human energy needs, eradicate energy poverty, enhance energy justice, and uphold
energy democracy. Energy Res Soc Sci 79:102199. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2021.102199
Smil V (2017) Energy and civilization: a history. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
Sovacool BK, Sidortsov RV, Jones BR (2014) Energy security, equality and justice. Routledge,
Abingdon, UK
United Nations (2015) Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
United Nations (2023) Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy. https://
www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/energy/. Accessed 7 Aug 2023
United Nations (2021) Leveraging energy action for advancing the sustainable development goals
U.S. Department of Energy (2021) The Smart Grid. www.smartgrid.gov/the_smart_grid/smart_
grid.html. Accessed 25 Dec 2021
Włodarczyk B, Firoiu D, Ionescu GH et al (2021) Assessing the sustainable development and
renewable energy sources relationship in EU countries. Energies 14:2323. https://doi.org/10.
3390/en14082323
Yergin D (2006) Ensuring energy security. Foreign Aff 85:69–82. https://doi.org/10.2307/20031912
Zakari A, Khan I, Tan D et al (2022) Energy efﬁciency and sustainable development goals (SDGs).
Energy 239:122365. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2021.122365
Sustainable Research Agenda
of the International Journal Discourse
and Communication for Sustainable
Education: Current Developments
and Future Perspectives
Dzintra Iliško and Berise Heasly
Abstract The research on sustainability has already become the agenda of the
day. International teams of scholars have already been addressing various themes
of sustainability in sufﬁcient depth and breadth by focusing attention on social,
ecological, economic, political, and cultural aspects of sustainability. By the use of
the method of bibliometric literature review, the authors intend to analyse research on
sustainability, and issues related to sustainable development and education during
the last ﬁve years, as revealed in the Journal of UNESCO Chair on the Interplay
of Tradition and Innovation in Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) at
Daugavpils University, Latvia. The articles provide an extensive overview of the
research agenda and show the scope of sustainability research that has broadened in
scope, and is growing stronger. The article also shows the geography of sustain-
ability challenges, including challenges addressed in practice and everyday life,
reﬂection on methodologies for sustainability research, and institutional policy devel-
opments on sustainability. By evaluating sustainability pathways and approaches and
by addressing challenges of smart governance, the article highlights the cases of good
practice and challenges that need to be addressed. The article also highlights issues
related to sustainability research that still remain unsolved and calls for contin-
uous efforts of improvement and for deeper transdisciplinary processes. Challenges
brought up by unsustainable consumption and an unpredictable intent as a way of
life can not be solved by technological ﬁxes but require deeper sustainability transi-
tions, co-evolution, multi-actor involvement, long-term thinking, open-mindedness
and tolerance of uncertainty.
Keywords Sustainability research · International journal · Sustainability
challenges · Co-evolutionary reconﬁguration processes
D. Iliško (B)
Daugavpils University, Daugavpils, Latvia
e-mail: dzintra.ilisko@du.Iv
B. Heasly
JTES and DCSE of the UNESCO Chair at Daugavpils University, Daugavpils, Latvia
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_24
421
422
D. Iliško and B. Heasly
1
Introduction
The paper presents bibliometric analyses of the Journal Discourse and Commu-
nication for Sustainable Education (DCSE) from 2018 until year 2023. DCSE is
an international peer-reviewed journal that provides a forum for discussion about
sustainability policies with regard to sustainable education, including discussion on
a broader range of issues related to sustainability discourse.
The intention of this study is to analyse several dimensions of the Journal by omit-
ting less signiﬁcant aspects. The analysis of qualitative and quantitative bibliometric
data includes:
(1) representing countries, institutions, authors, geographical scope and the diver-
sity of research on sustainability stemming from diverse parts of the world,
(2) editorial board members and co-editorship practice,
(3) research methodologies applied by the authors,
(4) content analyses: keywords and main themes related to sustainability initiatives
discussed in the Journal.
The paper will pay proper attention to both philosophical and theoretical aspects
of the research in substantiating sustainability and providing the analyses of papers
that reﬂect the cases of good practice in the ﬁeld of sustainable development.
The framework for the analyses of ten volumes of the journal, as suggested by
Whittemore and Knaﬂ(2005) will be used as a basis to synthesize themes within
a chosen sample, paying attention to the following variables: number of contribu-
tions per volume, representation by the countries, institutions, authors, co-authorship
patterns and data analysis methods. The sample comprises 123 articles in ten volumes
published during the last ﬁve years in total.
By the use of a framework for integrative review developed by Whittemore
and Knaﬂ(2005), articles were examined to determine the quality of writing by
comparing data within the articles and by providing a synthesis of themes and
patterns within the chosen sample. The papers will be analysed in terms of research
approaches, methods of data collection and analysis (Petticrew and Roberts 2009).
Quantitative bibliometric data analysis was performed by a simple counting proce-
dure of frequency of the following variables: number of contributions per volume,
representation of countries, institutions, authors, co-authorship patterns, and methods
of data analysis. The coding was carried out by the use of the semantic details from
the title, keywords, abstract, and main part of papers, thus performing the analyses of
literature in the ﬁeld of sustainability research. The research published in this journal
has been analysed in the context of Sustainability Agenda 2030.
Sustainable Research Agenda of the International Journal Discourse …
423
2
Methodology
For the purpose of analyses of research published in the last ten volumes of the journal
the authors have applied both quantitative and qualitative research methodology.
It reveals evolutionary nuances on sustainability research and uncovers emerging
trends, collaboration patterns, as well as helps to identify knowledge gaps and
discovers novel ideas for future investigations.
The bibliometric methodology has been applied for the study of the content of
all ten volumes in terms of the geographical location of the authors presented in
the journal, keywords, research methodology applied in the article and theoretical
approaches chosen by the authors as a research methodology. The bibliometric anal-
ysis includes both objective data (in this case, the number of articles published per
ten volumes, keywords, country representations) and subjective data (thematic anal-
yses, evaluation through informed procedures). As Donthy et al (2021) comment,
bibliometric analysis serves the intentional purpose of gaining an overview of work
done so far, to identify knowledge gaps and positioning contributions to the ﬁeld. It
enables and empowers scholars to gain a one-stop overview and to derive novel ideas
for the investigation by positioning a contribution to the ﬁeld. Meta-analyses will
provide a nuanced insight into the heterogeneity of research offered by the authors
(Baker at al. 2020). Since the studies presented by the authors in the journal are
homogeneous, the authors used meta- analyses with the aim to carry out quantitative
analyses of collected variables in addressing research questions.
The research will be analysed in the light of the developments for implementing
the Sustainability Agenda 2030 and 17 goals of Sustainable Development and values
emphasized in the recent report by the UNESCO (2022) Reimagining our Futures
Together.
3
Research Findings
The study aims to carry out qualitative and quantitative bibliometric analyses of
volumes published during the last ﬁve years. The data comprises the analyses of
articles from ten volumes of the journal with 123 articles in total.
3.1
Bibliographical Indicators of DCSE During 2018–2023:
The Editors, Editorial Board Members
The number of Editors in Chief has changed from four to two. The invited guest
editors were Javad Gholami from Urmia University, Iran for the Volume 10(1), 2018,
10(2),2018,Volume11(1),2019,andtheguestEditorJohannesLindnerfromUniver-
sity Teacher College in Vienna/Krems, Austria for the volume 12 (1) 2021, Volume
424
D. Iliško and B. Heasly
12 (2), 2021 and Volume 13 (1), 2022, and Volume 13(2), 2022. All ﬁve years Berise
Heasly has served as an Editor in Chief. She is representing the International network
of JTES and DCSE of the UNESCO chair at Daugavpils University, Latvia in co-
editorship with professors Ilga Salīte and Dzintra Iliško from Daugavpils University,
Latvia. The language editors of the Journal are Berise Heasly from Australia, Carol
Fortino from the University of Northern Carolina and Leila Gholami from Arizona
State University in the United States of America.
The last ﬁve years were rich with new members who have joined the editorial
board, including Michael Buchanan from Australian Catholic University, Mykolas
Simas Poškus from Romeris University in Lithuania, Svetlana Ušča from Rēzekne
Academy of Technologies in Latvia, Petro Du Preez and Lesley Le Grange from
South Africa, Liz Price from Manchester Metropolitan University in the United
Kingdom and Christine G. Schnitika from Auburn University in the United States of
America, as well as Julie Aitken Schermer from the University of Western Ontario
in Canada.
3.2
Geographical Scope of the Research Articles
Ten volumes of the journal comprise 123 articles in total. During the last ﬁve years
the authors who have published in the DCSE, represent diverse geographical loca-
tions and they are from Turkey (19 articles), Austria (16 articles) Germany (7 arti-
cles), Latvia (6 articles), USA (5 articles), Australia (4 articles), Norway (3 articles),
Sweden (3 articles), UK (3 articles), Jamaica (3), and South Africa (3 articles). Two
articles were published by the authors from Iran, Jamaica, Hungary and Finland, and
one paper was published by the authors from Canada, Japan, Philippines, Thailand,
Czech Republic, Spain, Portugal, Italy, Finland, Israel, Denmark, Japan, Vietnam,
Thailand, Ghana and Uzbekistan.
As Acedo et al. (2006) report, with the increased theoretical complexity, the
tendency of co-authorship is increasing in international research. In ten volumes,
in sixty-two papers, there is a co-authorship among the scientists from the same
country, and in fourteen papers; there is a co-authorship among the authors from
different countries and 37 papers are submitted by single authored publications by
research constituent, 26 papers were written in co-authorship of two authors, twenty
six papers were written in co-authorship of three authors, ten papers are written
in co-authorship of four authors and two papers are written in co-authorship of ﬁve
authors. The authors have built scientiﬁc bridges with researchers from neighbouring
countries as well as transatlantic bridges.
Sustainable Research Agenda of the International Journal Discourse …
425
3.3
Research Methodology
The articles in ten volumes of the journal present a wide spectrum of methodologies,
beginning with empirical research to case studies and the analyses of documents
regarding sustainability issues. Some studies reﬂect experimental design in search
of better solutions for a sustainable classroom practice. Out of all the studies, thirty-
seven papers contain quantitative research design, sixteen authors choose qualitative
research methodology, eleven studies can be classiﬁed as conceptual studies, two
studies involve a deep and detailed literature review, two are case studies, and four are
purely theoretical studies. This allows readers to conclude that a majority of authors,
particularly scholars from Turkey, gave priority to qualitative research methodology
in their studies.
3.4
The Thematic Elements of the Research Articles
Ten volumes of the journal include topical issues of the day, namely, environmental
concerns, issues related to inclusive and quality education, and previously unex-
plored topics including small-scale studies. The use of both quantitative or qualita-
tive methodologies provided the basis for contextualizing data for the more profound
and large-scale studies. The analysis of keywords allows conclusions that there is
only one reference to Green Deal, one to SDG, one to future thinking, sixteen refer-
ences to sustainability, three to educational leadership, eight references to sustainable
education, eleven to education for sustainable education, three to sustainable devel-
opment and ﬁfteen references to entrepreneurship education. The references in the
papers of the journal are related to environmental sustainability, social sustainability,
economic sustainability, and cultural sustainability. Discussion on issues related
to sustainability ranges across many perspectives by offering interdisciplinary and
solution–oriented research.
Some studies present conceptual and detailed reviews, like the analyses of the
results reached by the UNESCO World Decade of Education for Sustainable Devel-
opment 2005–2014 and outlines future developments with a particular reference to
good and smart governance in respect to human rights by striving towards devel-
opment of civic society as suggested by Brunold and Ohlmeier (2022). Another
conceptual study is offered by Ponce and Villegas (2022) who outlined a vision and
a framework of regenerative futures as contextualized for the higher institutions in
Philippines, by redeﬁning Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) through futures
thinking. These studies highlight the need to rethink and to reﬁne the notion of
sustainability and call for further developments in thriving for a more interconnected
and sustainable world. The authors call for a systemic transformational and co-
creative set of processes in overcoming destructive and dualistic patterns of thinking
while dealing with increasing complexity and diversity. Alguren (2021) provides a
profound theoretical overview of sustainability research outlined in 153 articles of
426
D. Iliško and B. Heasly
sustainable education from the educational databases on sustainability competencies.
Kapranov (2021) presents an overview of the discursive representation of education
for Sustainable Development in policy documents in Norway and Estonia. Kerscher
(2019) contributes to the debate about envisioning a sustainable future with regard
to reducing plastics as reﬂected in the EU policies. Fieldman (2021) contributes
to the discussion with his vision of greener Universities by exploring possibilities
of ecological reconstruction and reduction of ecological footprint in universities.
His study presents an overview of cases of climate activism and efforts of greening
education addressed by university-based campaigns.
The scope of studies is quite wide and begins with conceptual and philosophical
papers to small case studies reﬂecting the process and the result of the implemen-
tation of Sustainability Agenda 2030. Similar is the study by Belma Barak and
Avci (2022) who elaborate on implementing a sustainability agenda in secondary
schools in Germany and Turkey. Another example of a small case study for sustain-
ability reforms to be mentioned, that has been implemented in the teacher education
curriculum in Jamaica, is carried out by Clark (2022) who discusses the need for a
more contextually appropriate set of strategies of contextualizing ESD and highlights
salient components of curriculum reforms in Jamaica. Another small-scale study on
implementing sustainability in the Philippine State University has been carried out
by Ponce and Villegas (2022) who suggest a new and conceptual model to inform
regenerative efforts of a state university. The case study for sustainability in Agri-
culture from the Gibraltar Area (Spain) on Education for Sustainability has been
suggested by Casanova-Correa (2022), by prompting sustainability as a powerful
tool for bringing about changes in food production practices.
The group of authors of international team from the UK, Finland, Italy, and
Austria envision innovative sustainability-oriented agenda in fostering transforma-
tive behaviours in transnational and transdisciplinary perspective (Adeﬁla et al.
2021). The paper by Feldman (2021) focuses on possibilities of green initiatives
in the university setting as potential venue of the experimentation in supporting
sustainable development goals and prompting greening strategies by inviting diverse
actors, like business groups, industries, government, trade unions to act as key accel-
erators in fostering sustainable change. The authors have also identiﬁed barriers
of greening universities and discuss potentialities for discursive efforts for trans-
formations of universities. Similarly, Heasly et al. (2021) emphases the need for a
collaborative effort in reaching the goals of sustainable development. The authors
believe that higher education plays a crucial role in promoting the idea of sustain-
able development in cooperation with the NGO’s, a city’s municipality, in fostering
pro-environmental behaviour. The parameters of these smaller-scale projects indi-
cate how such research, while sourced within Educational organisations, also allow
elements of community education to emerge. In this way, Sustainability Goals expand
and bring nuanced information, expertise and skills to the fore.
Sustainable Research Agenda of the International Journal Discourse …
427
A majority of authors who have contributed their paper to the last ten volumes of
the Journal make an attempt to explore their issue of study through a sustainability
prism while identifying some interconnected aspects in their research.
One of the distinct issues as highlighted in many papers in inclusive quality
education that is envisioning diverse ways and strategies in reaching this ideal
(Ediyanto et al. 2020; Catubigan 2023; Andersen and Bagger 2023; Heasly and Iliško
2023b, a). In line with the SDG goal four, the authors are placing the emphases
on reducing disparities and inequities in education and providing quality educa-
tion for all by ensuring effective learning environments for children with disabil-
ities and special needs, refugees and displaced children. It places an imperative
for the educational system to treat all students fairly, regardless of their ability
to learn together in one environment. Inclusion refers to all students with visible
and hidden vulnerabilities to work together in one environment by offering them
adapted plans. Catubigan (2023) discusses ways of eradicating inappropriate oppor-
tunities with regard to vulnerable groups, particularly, children with the Autism
Spectrum Disorder. Andersen and Bagger (2023) discuss the impact of policies of
inclusion and exclusion in Sweden and Luxembourg on practice in the primary
schools in regards to diverse language backgrounds. Quality education as discussed
in many articles reafﬁrms the agenda that is in the heart of the United Nations (UN)
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, particularly the Sustainable Develop-
ment Goal 4 and recognized the need to offer inclusive quality education for all
learners from primary stage of schooling until lifelong education, including voca-
tional training and higher education. The research is in line with the UNESCO (2020,
2021) framework that puts an emphasis on advocacy, awareness raising, capacity
building and its implementation in practice.
The authors from Latvia view their issues within the overall framework of sustain-
ability legislation and current developments in their research as a bases for envi-
sioning a more sustainable future (Salīte 2022; Pipere 2019). In Latvia, sustain-
ability is a political principle that is reﬂected in both, a previous Latvian National
Development Plan 2014–2020. and in the new Latvian National Development Plan
2020–2027 (NAP 2027). After the review of the EU’s Sustainable Development
Strategy in 2006, the sustainable development planning process of the Latvian state
has started, with the involvement of citizens to contribute to a vision of the develop-
ment of Latvia in 2030. In Latvia, the principle of sustainability is not only a political
goal, but is the principle of territorial planning as well. Latvian government focuses
on such development, which emphasizes the responsible actions of each individual
on behalf of future generations. Sustainability is not only linked to the responsibility
of the state, but each member of the society must take care of the implementation
of this principle. Lessons learned from the previous Global Action Program (GAP),
can help Latvia to facilitate the implementation of the ESD for 2030 framework by
enhancing knowledge sharing, collaboration, mutual learning and advocacy among
a wide range of education stakeholders (UNESCO 2022).
428
D. Iliško and B. Heasly
In 2015, the UN General Assembly adopted the resolution “Transforming our
world: the sustainable development program for 2030”, or Agenda 2030 with the
17 SDGs and 169 sub-goals that must be achieved in order to reach a sustainable
redevelopment. Agenda 2030 was adopted in Latvia by balancing economic, social
and environmental thus becoming priorities of Latvia and emphasizes the participa-
tion of all in the planning and implementation of the SDG, namely, civil society, the
private sector, countries, national associations, the UN and other institutions.
Much of the attention has been placed on the issue of sustainable leadership
in the papers published by Cayak (2021) and Khumalo (2021). Sustainable leader-
ship is seen as a strategic framework for the organization’s sustainability. By priori-
tizing sustainable leadership, organizations can raise sustainability performance by
embracing a growing complexity of the world and educating long-term thinkers, as
well as developing eco-centric, systemic and long-term mindsets. Sustainable lead-
ership is seen as a capacity to see things in a new perspective and solve complex
problems as they emerge. Sathithada and Niramitchainont (2019) discuss scenarios
of a sustainable e-leadership in Thai higher educational institutions in the era of
information technologies.
One of a widely discussed issues in the Journal was social entrepreneur-
ship by Shaver et al. (2019), Müller et al. (2020), Forcher-Mayr and Mahlknecht
(2020), Kerstin Schmidt-Hönig and Pröbstl (2020), Fernbach (2020), Rigg and van
der Wal-Maris (2020), Pinho et al. (2019), who presented a critical approach to
entrepreneurship in general education by emphasizing individual capabilities by
enhancing entrepreneurial mindset, developing personal initiative, entrepreneurial
competences,andanawarenessofsustainability.Theauthorsassertthatentrepreneur-
ship education need to be fostered already in the primary school stage via creative
arts-based approached by applying a holistic whole school model.
Particular attention has been paid to the sustainable lifestyle in diverse country
contexts, like saving electricity in the schools in the United States as discussed
by Schnittka (2023), teaching recycling habits for the secondary school students
in Turkey by Betül Demİr and Ulukaya Öteleş (2023). Another study by Kotaman
et al. (2022) focuses on the need of educating early education teachers in developing
environmental attitude, environmental awareness, knowledge, attitudes and skills
how to integrate environmental issues in teaching. Kerscher (2019) discusses how
political discussion on reduction of use of plastic can be introduced in the primary
and secondary school agenda. Sustainable lifestyle has been in the centre of attention
of many authors, in relation to everyday behaviors, such as saving energy, choosing
sustainable transportation, reducing waste and recycling in order to educate students
to change their consumption patterns.
Sustainable Research Agenda of the International Journal Discourse …
429
4
Further Developments for Sustainability Research
Further research needs to be focused more as a transdisciplinary sustainability
research that could contribute to sustainability transformations, and a long term orien-
tation by involving stakeholders in the experimental and transformative processes in
their local communities by addressing complex contemporary sustainability chal-
lenges. The Sustainable Developmental Goals (SDG) can become an integrated
framework to sustainable development for further research (UN 2015) by indicating
the shift from a conceptual framework to measurable transformations. There is a
pressing need to assess the progress towards implementing SDG’s. Pressure also
seems to be present in the need to support teachers and researchers as a recognisable
global community.
The pandemic has impacted all pillars of sustainability. There is a growing
interest by the authors to tackle the consequences caused by the pandemic but
there is very fragmented research on sustainability research with regard to COVID
19 consequences. There is a research gap on sustainability development in post-
COVID circumstances. Therefore, more research is needed in addressing post-
COVID circumstances in developing future perspectives. More attention is needed
to implement with precision the progress in achieving 17 Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs), thus leading to more sustainable behaviour. Higher education has
a particular responsibility in achieving SDGs through research, and engagement in
communities of practice by educating students as potential decision makers (Heasly
and Iliško 2022; Iliško and Dedels 2018). Submissions that carry convincing evidence
are demonstrating that the progress in these gaps in reaching SDG’s, is welcome.
The strategic goal of the Editorial staff is to remain open to innovative studies in
the ﬁeld of sustainability research and other inspiring aspects. We support explicitly
submissions from the authors from diverse backgrounds, geographical origins, and
from the authors who are presenting innovative ideas and new conceptual perspec-
tives. In future we will welcome papers who see beyond conventional frameworks.
We are happy to extend geographic scope of the submissions and welcome method-
ologically contributions with qualitative, quantitative, and mixed method research,
including case studies and conceptual political studies.
The speed of publication processes has increased and this leads to difﬁculty
recruiting reviewers who provide high quality of reviews and thus leading to the
increasing processing time and reviewers are not granted sufﬁcient time for the
rigorous review. Being strongly grounded in high quality research, the editorial team
do take a longer time where needed in shaping the publication into high quality
writing. To maintain a high-quality community of researchers, the reviewers provide
careful and relevant constructive feedback until the quality of papers is high enough.
The priority is given to papers that provide solutions to complex issues, and to the
cases of good practice that demonstrate the transformational power of change, both
in knowledge, and in practice.
430
D. Iliško and B. Heasly
5
Conclusions
This study summarizes and provides a meta-analysis on research carried out on a
broad range of issues as seen through the sustainability prism with the aim of deeper
understanding of sustainability as it has been evolving over time and addressing the
goals of Sustainable Development. The study is based on the analyses of research
carried out by the authors who have published their studies in the International
journal: Discourse and Communication for Sustainable Education. Academics and
researchers who published in this journal try to identify the factors that hinder imple-
mentation of Sustainable Developmental Goals, and discuss country-speciﬁc sustain-
able developmental practices though environmental responsibility. Papers published
in the Journal are either empirical studies, analytical studies or policy discussion
papers. Many papers deﬁne sustainability as a responsibility in achieving certain
desired social, economic, and environmental outcomes.
This is observed that when many authors choose focusing more on environmental
and economic aspects of sustainability rather on social aspect and well-being of
all people. Although authors deﬁne sustainable development in terms of generally
accepted understandings of academic rigour, some authors outline integrated and
multi-dimensional models of sustainability through mutual interaction of political,
social, culture and environmental aspects of sustainability. Some authors present
progress of sustainability challenges in some particular regions and institutions.
While Eastern European countries make slower progress towards sustainability,
Western European countries show considerable progress towards sustainable Devel-
opment and Scandinavian countries are far ahead with their innovations with regard
to Sustainability agenda.
Bibliographic and meta-analyses of the last ten volumes of the Journal helped to
identify a geographical scope, co-authorship of research articles, research method-
ology used by the authors, engagement of international editors and editorial board
members, thematic elements related to sustainability, transdisciplinary research,
publications from academia and industry, a number of authors in co-authorship and
thematic clusters is increasingly a highlight.
Sustainability research is encompassing a wide range of issues, related to environ-
mental, social, economic and culture sustainability and address real world problems.
In discussing their issue, many authors adapt transdisciplinary approaches by offering
integrated frameworks for their issue of study and accelerate sustainable solutions
in a joint co-creation process with multiple stakeholders.
In upcoming volumes we welcome sustainability research that is open to
plurality of interests and research traditions by bringing in different epistemic
and non-epistemic views as a starting point to a greater trandisciplinarity research
aiming a greater real world impact. We will welcome diversity and richness of
conceptualization of sustainability for just and sustainable transformations.
Sustainable Research Agenda of the International Journal Discourse …
431
References
Acedo FJ, Barroso C, Casanueva C, Galan JL (2006) Co-authorship in management and
organizational studies: an empirical and network analysis. J Manage Stud 43(5):957–983
Adeﬁla A, Chen YF, Dang QA, Dewinter A, Antonelli M, Massari S, Saarto A, Viviani A, Filipova
T, Ammari-Allahyari TM, Karlsson L (2021) Integrating sustainability-oriented ecologies of
practice across the learning cycle: Supporting transformative behaviours in transgenerational,
transnational and transdisciplinary spaces. Discourse Commun Sustain Educ 12(2):142–154
Alguren B (2021) How to bring about change- a literature review about education and learning
activities for sustainable development. Discourse Commun Sustain Educ 12(1):5–22
AndersenKN,BaggerA(2023)LanguagepoliciesinSTEMsubjects:triggeringinclusion,exclusion
or abjection? Discourse Commun Sustain Educ 14(1):85–99
Baker HK, Pandey N, Kumar S, Haldar A (2020) A bibliometric analysis of board diversity: current
status, development, and future research directions. J Bus Res 108:232–246
Barak B, Avci G (2022) Comparative analysis of Turkey and Germany (Bavaria) secondary educa-
tion curricula in terms of education for sustainable development. Discourse Commun Sustain
Educ 13(2):108–132
Betül Demİr F, Öteleş U, Ülkü, (2023) A Sustainable life: a study on the recycling attitudes of
secondary school students. Discourse Commun Sustain Educ 14(1):137–152
Brunold A, Ohlmeier B (2022) Civic education for sustainable Development of UNESCO—Decade
2005–2014. Discourse Commun Sustain Educ 13(2):79–91
Casanova-Correa J, Vargas-Vergana M, Aragon L, Gomez-Chacon BG (2022) Education for sustain-
ability in the agriculture and livestock sector: educational experience in gibraltar area (Spain).
Discourse Commun Sustain Educ 13(2):17–37
Catubigan RV (2023) Mothers’ voices on Autism Spectrum Disorder: learning towards sustainable
inclusive education in Margusan, Philippines. Discourse Commun Sustain Educ 14(1):57–71
Cayak S (2021) The effect of sustainable leadership behaviours of school principals on teachers’
organizational commitment and job satisfaction. Discourse Commun Sustain Educ 13(2):79–91
Clark KR (2022) Education for sustainable development, curriculum reform and implications
for teacher education in a small Island developing state. Discourse Commun Sustain Educ
13(1):102–121
Donthy N, Kumar S, Mukherjee D, Nitesh P, MarcLim W (2021) How to conduct a bibliometric
analysis: an overview and guidelines. J Bus Res 133:285–296
Ediyanto M, Restuti A, Iva N, Kawai N (2020) The pre-service teachers’ attitudes towards inclusive
education: An empirical study in Yogyakarta city, Indonesia. Discourse Commun Sustain Educ
11(1):65–73. https://doi.org/10.2478/dcse-2020-0007
Fernbach E (2020) Social entrepreneurship education in art education of future primary school
teachers. Discourse Commun Sustain Educ 11(1):26–40. https://doi.org/10.2478/dcse-2020-
0004
Fieldman JM (2021) From the “Greta Thunberg Effect” to green conversation of universities: the
reconstructive praxis of discursive mobilizations. Discourse Commun Sustain Educ 12(1):140–
151
Forcher-Mayr M, Mahlknecht S (2020) Critical entrepreneurship education in general education
and TVET: two concepts of practice in a South African township. Discourse Commun Sustain
Educ 11(2):65–84. https://doi.org/10.2478/dcse-2020-0019
HeaslyB,IliskoD(2022)Towardsamoreregenerativeandresilientpost-pandemicworld.Discourse
Commun Sustain Educ 13(2):1–4
Heasly B, Iliško D (2023a) Mending vulnerabilities and ﬁnding creative solutions in the face of
increasing fragility. Discourse Commun Sustain Educ 14(1):1–5. https://doi.org/10.2478/dcse-
2023-0001
Heasly B, Iliško D (2023b) Editorial: Mending vulnerabilities and ﬁnding creative solutions in
the face of increasing fragility. Discourse Commun Sustain Educ 14(1):1–5. https://doi.org/10.
2478/dcse-2023-0001
432
D. Iliško and B. Heasly
Heasly B, Iliško D, Salīte I, Lindner J (2021) Looking beyond, looking together, looking collabo-
rately, facing the future. Discourse Commun Sustain Educ 12(1):1–4. https://doi.org/10.2478/
dcse-2021-0001
Iliško D, Dedels O (2018) Dealing with climate change as a wicked Issue via innovative approaches.
In: Azeiteiro U, Leal Filho W, Aires L. (eds), Climate literacy and innovations in climate change
education. Climate change management. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
70199-8_16
Kapranov O (2021) Discursive representation of education for sustainable development in policy
documents by English medium instruction schools in Estonia and Norway. Discourse Commun
Sustain Educ 12(1): 55–67
Kerscher U (2019) Towards a sustainable future? The EU policies concerning plastics and their
didactical potential for primary and secondary teaching. Discourse Commun Sustain Educ
10(1):53–81
Khumalo SS (2021) A Descriptive analysis of the leadership practices of primary school princi-
pals in promoting sustainability through motivating teachers. Discourse Commun Sustain Educ
12(1):42–55
Kotaman H, Karaboğa İ, Bilgin S, Tuğrul B (2022) Impact of in-service environmental education on
early childhood teachers’ environmental attitude. Discourse Commun Sustain Educ 13(2):26–
39. https://doi.org/10.2478/dcse-2022-0016
Müller S, Berger G, Gutzwiller-Helfenﬁnger E (2020) Establishing entrepreneurial thinking and
Acting in Swiss Vocational Colleges. Discourse Commun Sustain Educ 11(2):121–136. https://
doi.org/10.2478/dcse-2020-0022
Petticrew M, Roberts H (2009) Systematic reviews in the social sciences. A practical guide, 8th
edn. Blackwell Publishers, Malden
Pinho MI, Fernandes D, Mascarenhas D (2019) Youth start social entrepreneurship program for
kids: Portuguese UKIDS-Case Study. Discourse Commun Sustain Educ 10(2):33–48. https://
doi.org/10.2478/dcse-2019-0016
Pipere A (2019) Journal of teacher education for sustainability after the UN decade of education
for sustainable development: exploring for the future. J Teach Educ Sustain 21(1):5–34
Ponce RG, Villegas JP (2022) Beyond sustainability: positioning regenerative futures in a Philippine
State university. Discourse Commun Sustain Educ 10(1):5–13
Rigg E, van der Wal-Maris S (2020) Student teacher’s learning about social entrepreneurship educa-
tion—A Dutch pilot study in primary teacher education. Discourse Commun Sustain Educ
11(1):41–53
Salīte I, Fjodorova I, Ivanova O (2022) A co-evolutionary perspective in the search for sustainable
education. J Teach Educ Sustain 24(2):1–4. https://doi.org/10.2478/jtes-2022-0012
Sathithada K, Niramitchainont P (2019) Scenarios of a sustainable e-leadership for Thai Higher
educational institution leaders in 2027. Discourse Commun Sustain Educ 10(1):81–90. https://
doi.org/10.2478/dcse-2019-0007
Schmidt-Hönig K, Pröbstl G (2020) The World in children’s minds—or sustainable entrepreneur-
ship education as empowerment to shape a desirable future. Discourse Commun Sustain Educ
11(2):33–44. https://doi.org/10.2478/dcse-2020-0017
Shaver K, Wegelin J, Commarmond I (2019) Assessing entrepreneurial mindset: results for a new
measure. Discourse Commun Sustain Educ 10(2):13–21. https://doi.org/10.2478/dcse-2019-
0014
Transforming our world: the sustainable development program for 2030 (2015). https://www.mmv.
org/sites/default/ﬁles/uploads/docs/publications/2030_Agenda_Sustainable_Development.pdf
UN United Nations (2015) Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Develop-
ment. Resolution A/RES/70/1. https://www.un.org/en/development/desa/population/migration/
generalassembly/docs/globalcompact/A_RES_70_1_E.pdf.
UNESCO (2020) Global education monitoring report, 2020: Inclusion and education: all means all.
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000373718
Sustainable Research Agenda of the International Journal Discourse …
433
UNESCO (2021). 2021 GEM Report Central and Eastern Europe, Caucasus and Central Asia
Report-Inclusion and education: All means all. https://www.unesco.org/gem-report/en/inclusion
UNESCO (2022) Reimagining our futures together. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000
379381
Whittemore R, KnaﬂK (2005) The integrative review: updated methodology. J Adv Nurs 52(5):546–
553
A Science Diplomacy Agenda
for Sustainable Development Research
Julia M. Puaschunder
Abstract Science Diplomacy acknowledges the fact that global, commonly-shared
problems are too urgent, large and complex to be solved by one or some nation-states.
By the use of unconventional methods, such as systems analysis and decision science,
science diplomacy spearheads advancements in tackling global challenges. Science
diplomacy thereby combines the forces of research with diplomatic missions. Focus
on scientiﬁc facts—while leaving aside political frictions and historical national
denominations—allows science diplomats to complement traditional global gover-
nance effectively. Aspirational goals of sustainable development demand for scien-
tiﬁc attention to complement traditional national diplomacy for reaching an inter-
national compromise. Science diplomacy advocates for addressing global goals of
sustainable development through academic cooperation and scientiﬁc leadership.
This paper captures the history of Science Diplomacy and presents a comparative
measurement of the potential of different nations around the globe to lead and engage
in Science Diplomacy based on their academia quota and institutions as well as their
diplomatic relations in embassies, consulates and other representations abroad. The
Science Diplomacy potential of countries to lead on climate stabilization will then be
outlined based on the country-speciﬁc responsibility to protect the earth from climate
change. The ﬁndings hold invaluable insights for advocating for science diplomacy
to guide on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The qualitative strengths
of certain science disciplines will be outlined for the pursuit of the SDGs in science
diplomacy. Overall, science diplomacy advantages and success factors for imple-
menting sustainable development in cooperation with conventional governance and
corporate leadership are provided. The discussion closes with future perspectives
and research avenues to advance the ﬁeld of science diplomacy for the alleviation of
the most pressing contemporary challenges.
Keywords Climate change · Climate change economic impacts · Climate justice ·
Cultural diplomacy · Decision science · Disparate impact analysis · Global
governance · International affairs · Macroeconomics · Negotiation · Negotiation
J. M. Puaschunder (B)
Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, Columbia University, New York, USA
e-mail: Julia.Puaschunder@columbia.edu
URL: http://blogs.cuit.columbia.edu/jmp2265; https://www.juliampuaschunder.com
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_25
435
436
J. M. Puaschunder
Leadership · Public affairs · Public policy · Resilience ﬁnance · Science
diplomacy · Soft diplomacy · Sustainability · Systems analysis
1
Introduction
Global warming and sustainability management demands heightened the urgency for
global concerted collaboration. This chapter addresses the role of science diplomacy
for sustainability. Science diplomacy conveys the idea to connect world leaders over
scientiﬁc observations in pursuing common endeavors to combat global crises or
accomplish major common endeavors. Science diplomacy thereby allows decision
makers to leave aside political denominations and individual country interests but
connect over scientiﬁc hard facts in the evaluation of risks and creative solution
ﬁnding for global problems. While science diplomacy offers a range of beneﬁts for
sustainability planning, action and management; to this day our understanding of the
use of science diplomacy for sustainability is limited.
Theadvantagesofsciencediplomacyaregainedforscientistsanddiplomacyalike.
Science collaborations can learn from diplomacy in the appreciation for differences.
Researchers can also adopt a high culture to connect ﬁrst over similarities in order to
then discuss topics with different contested viewpoints, which is a common practice
in diplomacy. Science diplomacy can then employ joint forces in order to achieve
common goals and mutually-shared beneﬁts.
At the same time, diplomacy can be strengthened by scientiﬁc information and
engagement networks and channels. Scientiﬁc channels can thus serve as additional
gateways to enact common plans and strengthen international ties. Diplomats can
also use measurable hard-science facts to embrace critical counterparts and engage
them in rational and focused communication leaving aside historical frictions and
contested political terrains. In all these features science diplomacy offers common
denominators in the understanding of global challenges that can only be surmounted
in international agreements.
This chapter addresses the relevance of science diplomacy for sustainability and
offers a unique macroeconomic model of science diplomacy. Science diplomacy
for sustainability offers the advantages of scientiﬁc hard facts and global connec-
tivity of academic circles. Science diplomats also serve the scientiﬁc community
longer and more stable in tenured positions than political appointees. The long-term
vision and academic freedom to pursue endeavors with unknown outcomes, espe-
cially in general research, predestine science diplomats to accomplish sustainability
goals. Science diplomacy is therefore a viable and powerful method to complement
traditional diplomacy and ordinary governmental policy efforts. It is thus surprising
that comparatively little attention has been paid to use the forces of science diplo-
macy to work towards sustainability, in particular in the context of the Sustainable
Development Goals.
This chapter addresses the role of science diplomacy for sustainability research.
An index will be presented including 51 countries around the world ranked on their
A Science Diplomacy Agenda for Sustainable Development Research
437
science diplomacy potential (Puaschunder 2022c). The relevance of science diplo-
macy in the urgent quest to avert climate change through mitigation and adaptation
is stressed. The Science Diplomacy Index will be applied to the Responsibility to
Protect from global warming. The results allow for deriving inferences on the role
of science diplomacy in accomplishing the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
(Puaschunder 2023).
The chapter breaks novel ground to consider the potential of science diplomacy
for sustainable development in light of the SDGs. Clear advantages of science diplo-
macy use for sustainable development are given as well as boundary conditions and
obstacles for science diplomacy to lead on the SDG implementation are mentioned.
Overall, science diplomacy for SDG enactment is a novel and innovative way to
harness the power of academia and soft diplomacy for the alleviation of the most
pressing contemporary sustainable development areas around the world.
The paper is structured as follows: First, the concept of science diplomacy is
introduced. Then the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are presented. The
method of science diplomacy in employing systems analysis is discussed as a way
to help capture complex interaction and implementation terrains. An index that
quantiﬁes science diplomacy is applied for climate action endeavors, which indi-
cates clear directives on which countries have better means of employing science
diplomacy for climate mitigation and adaptation. Science diplomacy potentials for
accomplishing and implementing the SDGs are outlined. The discussion prepares
for research on the role of science diplomacy for sustainable development including
studies on the boundary conditions and obstacles to science diplomacy solutions.
Future perspectives for science diplomacy in law & economics research are provided.
2
Science Diplomacy
The history of diplomacy dates back to the BC age. Modern diplomacy was formed
around the eighteenth century. Since the 1930s the idea of science diplomacy devel-
oped. Human exchange via hard science measurable facts was then coupled with
diplomatic goals of international exchange and mutual collaboration on global chal-
lenges. During the Cold War era of the 1960s to 1980s, science diplomacy excelled in
enabling communication and cooperation between nation-states that were ofﬁcially
not allowed to interact with each other. Institutional ties fortiﬁed research collabo-
ration that was used to establish networks of exchange beyond closed borders. The
rationality of hard science facts helped to overcome problematic political standpoints
and opened gates to embrace a broad range of nations in the accomplishment of global
goals.
Science diplomacy fortiﬁes traditional diplomacy (Barston 2014; Bjola and Korn-
probst 2018; Constantinou et al. 2016; Nye 1990; Sharp 2016; Szkarłat 2020). At
the core of science diplomacy rests scientiﬁc cooperation and compromise for higher
goals of global stability, sustainable development and common security.
438
J. M. Puaschunder
Scientiﬁc collaboration is used in science diplomacy as an additional way to
address global problems and ﬁnd international solutions (The Vienna Statement
on Science Diplomacy 2022). Complementary to traditional diplomatic service and
intercultural exchange, scientists thereby use technical, research-based academic
discourse and scientiﬁc networks to engage international colleagues in tackling
international concerns.
The advantages of science diplomacy are the relative political and ﬁnancial inde-
pendence of scientists compared to statesmen. The political saying ‘science only
concerns scientists’ underlines the rather dislocated role of researchers in govern-
mental affairs, which predestines researchers to exchange information freer from
governmentaloversightandmediascrutinythanconventionaldiplomats.Researchers
are also trained to focus on scientiﬁc hard facts rather than promoting national country
interests or advocating for stakeholder demands like politicians, who often have
to align with their voting bodies. Scientists are also longer in ‘ofﬁce’ given tenure
mandates than conventional politicians, who have terms determined by voting cycles,
or diplomats, who change outposts every now and then.
Historically, even during political travel bans and communication restrictions,
scientists were allowed to travel, for instance, in cases of East–West tensions, such
as with the US and Cuba as well as during the old Cold War era in Europa. Scien-
tists thereby appear to be standing rocks in maintaining communication channels
and key information exchange network participants that transcend national politics
(Gluckman et al. 2022).
For science diplomats, the practice to collaborate internationally on global issues
of concern can also be an additional motivational factor. Science diplomacy can also
serve as additional gratiﬁcation or even remuneration on top of a scientiﬁc career
when considering international exchange programs, such as the Fulbright professor-
ship or international consultancy roles with global governance institutions, scientists
sometimes engage in. Science diplomacy efforts thereby also allow tapping into a
larger pool of resources to mobilize people and prosper their ideas than conventional
national budgets. This strategy appears especially helpful in international develop-
ment goals, where science diplomacy can serve as a quasi-human capital remittance.
Science diplomacy leverages thereby to an additional international aid mechanism.
Funds for scientiﬁc endeavors are also often nationally independent, e.g., think of the
European Research Council grants or European Commission outreach scholarships.
Funding from scientiﬁc resources for general science also mostly comes with the
luxury of no concrete result pressures and leeway in the interpretation of the work
mandate plus the freedom to not have to follow a national-political interest agenda
as well as less red tape involved. Science in its purest form also often comes with
less international media scrutiny and market interference. Scientists also beneﬁt from
their luxury of integrity and only having to serve the higher purpose of truthfulness
and accuracy (Puaschunder 2020a).
Previous cross-border topics of discussion that were supported by science
discourse rather than diplomatic missions include technological advancements and
energy creation, sustainable development and the Ozone Layer, nuclear power use
and outer space missions (Gluckman et al. 2022). In climate change awareness
A Science Diplomacy Agenda for Sustainable Development Research
439
raising, for example, the U.S. National Academy of Sciences became instrumental
in informing the U.S. White House during the George W. Bush administration. The
urgency of action against global warming was stressed and successfully changed the
administration’s course on environmental concerns.
Institutions that engage in science diplomacy and train and employ science diplo-
mats are global governance institutions (e.g., World Bank, International Mone-
tary Fund and United Nations), National Academies of Sciences around the world
(e.g., the US National Academy of Sciences (NAS), the Academy of Science of
South Africa (ASSAf), The American Academy of Arts and Sciences (AMACAD),
The Australian Academy of Science (AAS), The Brazilian Academy of Sciences
(ABC), The Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), The German National Academy
of Sciences (Leopoldina), The Indian National Science Academy (INSA), The Israel
Academy of Sciences and Humanities, The National Academy of Sciences (NAS),
The Polish Academy of Sciences, The Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and
Sciences (KNAW)) and associated and related agencies (such as the Association
for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) in Washington D.C. that houses a Center
for Science Diplomacy, the European Commission that funds global collaboration,
outreach and engagement activities).
One of the ﬂagship institutions that practiced science diplomacy since its founding
in the cold war period is the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
(IIASA) in Laxenburg, Austria. Set up in the aftermath of World War II on—back
then—neutral territory, this international institution brings together scientists from
all over the world to get familiar with systems analysis. Scientiﬁc ﬁelds represented
at IIASA include mathematics and logic, economics and psychology as well as the
emerging ﬁeld of decision sciences coupled with behavioral aspects.
At IIASA scientists are trained in applying goal-oriented approaches to help iden-
tify systems and procedures that beneﬁt the efﬁcient accomplishment of large-scale
endeavors (Whitten and Bentle 2007). Also trained in methods emerging in decision
sciences, science diplomats would become well-versed in problem-solving tech-
niques that break down complex systems to focus on achievements of measurable
results rather than practicing political customs (Whitten and Bentle 2007).
The Vienna Statement on Science Diplomacy (2022) describes the scientiﬁc
collaboration to address common and shared problems in freedom of cooperation
aside from political agendas. At the same time, researchers can beneﬁt from diplo-
matic tact in the respectful debate of contemporary problems. The traditional diplo-
matic corps wins in science diplomacy through the precision of scientiﬁc facts and
the rigor in the investigation of natural science argumentation. All these credentials
let science diplomacy appear as the most helpful panacea to overcome contemporary
challenges in the global compound.
To this day, science diplomacy is used to discuss common solutions for large-
scale global problems in order to ﬁnd a commonly agreed-upon solution strategy in
the international arena. Today’s global challenges in the rising East–West conﬂict
tension, the global warming problem as well as international pandemic threats and the
regulation of the common digital space on the internet and digitalization advancement
440
J. M. Puaschunder
demand for fast action through mutual understanding of a multitude of international
actors.
In the contemporary climate change negotiations and discussions on the current
state of the world, the United Nations Conferences of the Parties (COP) Intergovern-
mental Panels on Climate Change (IPCC) reports are mainly led by scientiﬁc investi-
gators. Science diplomacy is also one of the most innovative attempts to address the
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) as aspirational endeavors
to make the world a better place. The SDGs of the United Nations could now also
beneﬁt from the concerted action of scientists in their diplomatic efforts.
3
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
The United Nations (UN) Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are meant to foster
a “shared blueprint for peace and prosperity for people and the planet, now and into
the future” (United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Sustainable
Development, retrieved June 19, 2023). The UN SDGs are a collection of seventeen
interrelated objectives to improve global conditions lastingly for humankind. The UN
SDGs comprise “no poverty; zero hunger; good health and well-being; quality educa-
tion; gender equality; clean water and sanitation; affordable and clean energy; decent
work and economic growth; industry, innovation and infrastructure; reduced inequal-
ities; sustainable cities and communities; responsible consumption and production;
climate action; life below water; life on land; peace, justice, and strong institutions;
and partnership for the goals” (United Nations Department of Economic and Social
Affairs, Sustainable Development, retrieved June 19, 2023).
Sprung out of the Millennium Development Goals, the United Nations General
Assembly incepted the SDGs in 2015 as aspirational long-term goals. Each goal
identiﬁes more speciﬁc targets and indicators as well as concrete progress measure-
ment and tracking techniques (United Nations Resolution 2017). The goals address
the most contemporary global concerns that are often interrelated. The overall SDGs
are further broken down into 169 individual targets. Progress is meant to be measured
by indicators estimating target accomplishments on a more granular and local level
than the actual SDGs (Pierce 2018).
Problems in the implementation are viewed to lie in too many complex goals.
Oftentimes there are partially conﬂicting interests in the pursuit of targets of the
multiple stakeholders involved. National interests may get in the way of global
accomplishments based on mutual cooperation. First-movers are often viewed to
pay the price for free riders in collective action problems. In addition, there is a lack
of political leadership and divergent national interests and approaches mentioned in
the literature on the actual implementation of the SDGs (Biermann et al. 2022). Too
aspirational goals have also been shown to crowd out motivation to work towards
too ambitious plans (Leibovitch and Stremitzer 2022). Cultural aspects and Western-
tainted modalities in implementing the SDGs have been criticized by intercultural
studies demanding for a more inclusive approach than top-down goals. Another
A Science Diplomacy Agenda for Sustainable Development Research
441
critique of the initial SDGs was the lack of paying attention to access to technolo-
gies and digitalization as a panacea for international development obstacles yet also
underestimating digital inequality in the global arena.
In the cost analysis of the SDG implementation, the major national accounting
capital—which is human capital—has largely been ignored and sidelined for a focus
on estimating and monetizing the purely ﬁnancial capital costs. Research on potential
economic short-term gains of disasters (e.g., the short-term economic productivity
gains expected by warming countries in the wake of climate change) has completely
been neglected even though the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
and the UN Conferences of the Parties (COP) meetings—by now—call for a disparate
impact analysis of climate change and natural disasters in order to fund redistribution
strategies to enact distributional climate justice.
Attempts to make the SDGs inclusive and work for everyone comprise localizing
the SDGs and a Decade of Action Plan (Sustainable Development Goals, Decade of
Action retrieved June 19, 2023). The multi-stakeholder global impetus of the SDGs
requires innovative ways to embrace many voices around the world in a concerted
action plan. Outcome targets and means of implementation targets work concurrently
towards the accomplishment of broad-based goals (Bartram et al. 2018).
Future endeavors to strengthen the SDGs concern cross-border efforts and stream-
lining cooperation between nation-states (Pierce 2018). While the UN SDG frame-
work provides a shared vision from the top down, the implementation and success
will depend on the bottom-up effort in concrete global and local collaboration. In
streamlining the socio-political agenda, synergies will be created based on high-level
thinking to accomplish the goals in the global arena. Employing science diplomacy
systems analysis appears as the most innovative way to complement conventional
goal attainment.
4
Applied Science Diplomacy Employing Systems Analysis
Applied science diplomacy often uses systems analysis, which is the study of proce-
dures and how systems effectively help reaching common goals (Whitten and Bentle
2007). These problem-solving techniques break down complex systems to help
understand how complex system parts interact.
Systems analysis is interdisciplinary and inﬂuenced by many ﬁelds, such as math-
ematics, logic, economics, psychology, engineering and information technology.
This heterodox methodological approach acknowledges a higher Gestalt in large-
scale systems that are larger than its individual components. Systems analysis is also
pluralistic in the openness to creative out-of-the-box high-level thinking. Processes,
procedures and methods ﬁnding in a systems analysis approach beneﬁt from open-
ness to cultural and system speciﬁcities more than other traditional approaches, e.g.,
such as the neoclassical standardized optimization and maximation efforts.
Systems analysis used in science diplomacy is often inﬂuenced by decision
sciences. Behavioral economists thereby inform about outcome likelihoods and
442
J. M. Puaschunder
human choice patterns to better estimate risks and uncertainties’ impact on goal
attainment. Operations and procedures are scrutinized in order to investigate system
features that are beneﬁcial for mutual beneﬁt outcomes.
Systems analysis usually comprises a scope of problem deﬁnition including stake-
holder analysis; a problem analysis to understand the different stakeholder needs and
wants as well as constraints and policy realities; the requirement analysis outlining
the external but also internal conditions applied to the problem; a logical design to
understand the logic relation between key actors and objects involved in the solution
ﬁnding; as well as an informed decision analysis based on risk analysis, logic anal-
ysis and behavioral insights. The big data digitalization age has leveraged systems
analysis to an advanced computational effort in all inﬂuential systems analysis steps.
5
Quantifying Science Diplomacy for Climate Action
Inaﬁrstattempttoquantifysciencediplomacy,Puaschunder(2023)createdaScience
Diplomacy Index that integrates (1) the academia quota per country as an indication
of scientiﬁc excellence based on World Bank Educational Attainment data; (2) a
modiﬁed World Ranking of academic institutions weighted by the relevance of its
academic institutions; and (3) the Lowy Global Diplomacy Index measuring diplo-
matic relations in embassies, consulates, or other diplomatic representations. The
Science Diplomacy Index serves as a measure to identify which countries have the
best starting grounds to engage in science diplomacy action (Puaschunder 2023).
The Science Diplomacy Index identiﬁed U.S. and Russia as leaders in science
diplomacy (Puaschunder 2023). Africa foremost engages in science diplomacy in
South Africa (Puaschunder forthcoming). In Asia, Japan and India but also South
Korea, Indonesia as well as the Philippines, Malaysia and Thailand, Bangladesh,
Vietnam, China, Singapore, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nepal, Brunei and Bhutan are
capable of employing science diplomats (Puaschunder forthcoming). Australia and
New Zealand also have science diplomacy outreach on global issues of concern
(Puaschunder forthcoming). Within Eurasia, Saudi Arabia and Israel engage in
science diplomacy (Puaschunder forthcoming). In Europe, the United Kingdom,
France and Germany are leaders in science diplomacy missions followed by
Spain, Poland, Italy, the Netherlands, Portugal, Belgium, Greece, Hungary, Sweden,
Ireland, Denmark, Norway and Czech Republic, Austria, Finland, Lithuania,
Slovakia, Latvia, Slovenia, Estonia and Iceland (Puaschunder forthcoming). In
addition to the U.S., Canada also features academic diplomacy in North America
(Puaschunder 2023). In South America Brazil, Mexico and Chile engage in science
diplomacy (Puaschunder 2023).
One of the areas of highest concern of a worldwide problem is climate change.
Global warming has been noticed as a trend for decades but the urgency of action
to combat climate change effects has heightened since the turn of the millennium.
Puaschunder (2020b) outlined vast differences around the world in the economic
A Science Diplomacy Agenda for Sustainable Development Research
443
prospects under climate change. Relatively calculated, some countries have a short-
term economic advantage from a warming globe, while other countries lose out the
most and the fastest from climate change (Puaschunder 2020b). These country differ-
ences on a climate change winner and loser spectrum became the basis of assigning
different responsibilities to act on climate change (Puaschunder 2020b, 2023). Most
recently,Puaschunder(2023)appliedamacroeconomicmodelthatintegratestherela-
tive climate change economic prospects with the Science Diplomacy Index around
the world in order to determine the individual countries’ responsibilities to reverse
the negative impacts of global warming (Puaschunder 2023).
When integrating the Science Diplomacy Index with climate responsibility
measures that concern climate injustices, Puaschunder (2023) outlines concrete
countries that have the best conditions but also heightened responsibility to protect
the earth from global warming. The United States, Russia as well as Japan and
India, Germany, the United Kingdom, Canada, China, South Korea and France have
good conditions to establish cooperation through science diplomacy (Puaschunder
2023). These countries also have a heightened responsibility to act on climate change
based on their relative, short-term expected economic gains under climate change
(Puaschunder 2023). Poland, Mexico, Brazil, Spain, Italy and Australia should
also play a role in science diplomacy leadership for climate justice (Puaschunder
2023). Additional countries of interest to help with science diplomacy on global
warming are the Netherlands, Indonesia, Belgium, South Africa, Czech Republic,
Chile,SaudiArabia,Sweden,Portugal,Greece,Austria,Norway,Malaysia,Hungary,
Finland, Israel, Denmark, the Philippines, Ireland, Vietnam, Thailand, Mongolia,
NewZealand,Bangladesh,Slovakia,Lithuania,Latvia,Slovenia,Estonia,Singapore,
Iceland and Nepal (Puaschunder 2023).
This model now can inform future research on the importance of science diplo-
macy and macroeconomic correlates for the global and local cooperation needed to
enact the Sustainable Development Goals.
6
Science Diplomacy for Accomplishing the SDGs
Based on the history of science diplomacy and the historic role of science diplomats
in incepting concepts such as sustainable development and climate change awareness
building; the time has come for science diplomacy to aid in the accomplishment of
the SDGs.
Quantifying science diplomacy potentials has opened novel gates to target essen-
tial proponents of the SDGs. While the United Nations is a ‘one-country-one-
vote’ democratic global governance decision-making authority, other Bretton Woods
global governance institutions favor certain countries’ decisions based on country
contributions, e.g., the International Monetary Fund (IMF) or the World Bank.
In approaching the SDGs and assigning leadership roles on an international basis
for SDG employment, those countries that have established ties in science diplomacy
444
J. M. Puaschunder
networks have the best starting grounds to enact the SDGs. Coupled with redistri-
bution mandates and responsibilities to protect schemes, country comparisons on
science diplomacy could offer insights into what countries have better means but
also face higher responsibilities to aid the world in the accomplishment of the SDG
goals and targets.
Concurrently employing systems analysis could also help in understanding the
realities of target pursuit constraints. Research on the particular disparate impact of
climate change around the world can help elucidate responsibilities in the common
SDG pursuit strategy (Puaschunder 2020b). Comparative global governance could
fortify our understanding of what concepts have worked in certain countries to be
applied to others. In particular, comparative approaches would clarify what science
diplomacy ingredients are favorable in the international compound. Comparing
country approaches could also provide insights into how science diplomacy is related
to macroeconomic stability and resilience variables for international development.
Keeping aid on the most granular local level in mind, science diplomacy can also
call for applied on-the-ground heterodox scientiﬁc methods sharing granting fast and
meaningful aid recommendations.
Science diplomacy for sustainability is employed in multiple facets as the wish
for sustainability and science diplomacy overlaps in fruitful ways. Figure 1 outlines
the goals of science diplomacy and concerns around sustainability as well as the
overlapping connection with helpful results.
Science diplomacy offers international outreach for the global and universal
concern for sustainability. Science diplomacy is driven by precise macroeconomic
results that can be used to quantify the current state, maximize utility and societal
Fig. 1 Connection between sustainability research and science diplomacy
A Science Diplomacy Agenda for Sustainable Development Research
445
welfare over time and discount future predictions—all these features are invalu-
able assets for measuring, implementing, monitoring and evaluating sustainability
research and management. The feature of the lifetime appointment of tenured
academics predestines science diplomats for the pursuit of long-term endeavors as
embodied in sustainability research and management. Search for truth with integrity
to speak one’s mind based on data-driven opinion formation are at the core of empiric
research, which is crucial for the understanding and evaluation of sustainability
status, practice and evaluation. The independence of academics from politics and
industry further enables academics to perform fast-paced without serving multiple
stakeholders, such as voters, donors, political allies, industry lobbyists and interest
groups, to name a few groups politicians have to be cautious about. Scientists can
also ignore historical frictions and political denominations between countries that
traditional diplomats and statesmen/women have to be vigilant about. In their pursuit
of grand ideas and big projects with unknown outcomes, scientists can also serve
to deliver the innovative and iterative solutions needed to enable and enact sustain-
ability around the world in many different domains. Academics also have efﬁcient
information exchange established in scientiﬁc outlets and constant meeting oppor-
tunities around the world, which empowers scientists to become catalysts of change
and transfer agents for best practices as needed for sustainability management in the
global arena. Scientists are trained in complex problem evaluations under tight dead-
lines and have therefore best-starting grounds to support complex interconnected
goals on an international basis, which the Sustainable Development Goals represent.
The diplomatic conveyance of facts that science diplomats are further trained in also
enables them to serve sustainability proponents with fact-based solution ﬁnding. The
futuristic angle of science fulﬁlls the sustainability mandate to address intergener-
ational concerns, against which different overlapping generations may be pitted. In
their role to connect the worlds of industry development and political feasibility,
academics have the potential to contribute successfully to the multi-stakeholder
endeavors of sustainability and the larger international community in their pursuit
of the Sustainable Development Goals. The ethical mandates of academia, such
as the search for truth, honesty, integrity and service to the public, make science
diplomats excellent socially-responsible advocates for international ethical concerns
and voicing the needs of future world inhabitants, which lies at the heart of sustain-
ability. Overall, all the mentioned features and credentials connect science diplomacy
with sustainability. Science diplomacy in the sustainability domain allows for data-
driven global solutions built on international negotiations’ consensus backed by hard
science facts. Science diplomats addressing sustainability, therefore, create global
long-term value for this generation and the following independent of industry or
political interests.
446
J. M. Puaschunder
7
Science Diplomacy for Implementing the SDGs
In order to leverage science diplomacy potentials for implementing the SDGs, the
following concrete qualitative science diplomacy strengths should be considered:
GOAL 1: No Poverty: The ‘no poverty’ pledge appears to be closely related to
international development. In order to foster the ‘no poverty’ goal, science diplomats
could be employed to elucidate disparate economic impacts that lead to differences in
wealthdistributionsaroundtheglobe.Foremosteconomistsbutalsolaw&economics
andﬁnanceresearcherscouldhelpinlookingintostrategicredistributionmechanisms
and means to help come closer to no poverty around the globe. Economists could
calculate concrete country differences and further zoom into marginalized popula-
tion groups. Law & economics specialists could help with disparate impact analysis
to connect wealth disparities to policy outcomes. Finance researchers could comple-
ment all these efforts by ﬁnding creative ways how to redistribute funds around the
world but also reallocate resources within society and concrete communities.
GOAL 2: Zero Hunger: Related to ‘no poverty,’ the ‘zero hunger’ call is housed
in international development. Innovatively, the scientiﬁc ﬁelds of economics and
ﬁnance could aid with information on commodity prices and the inﬂuence of stock
market trading in commodities on imposing hunger in third-world countries. Political
scientists may also explore the role of East–West tensions on shortages around the
world, especially when it comes to commodities such as wheat, barley, corn, and
sunﬂower oil. Lastly, the role of sticky inﬂation and supply chain markups could be
further discussed by economists in order to raise awareness of the underlying market
dynamics in the accomplishment of ‘zero hunger’ goals around the world.
GOAL3:GoodHealthandWell-being:‘Goodhealthandwell-being’havebecome
subject to extensive scrutiny by scientiﬁc investigation most recently during the
COVID pandemic. ‘Good health and well-being’ have been acknowledged as hall-
marks of productive societies. Health in relation to individual wealth and national
gross domestic productivity are a newly emerging academic stream (Puaschunder
2022b). Well-being and holistic medical attention are positive advancements in
the aftermath of the COVID pandemic, which may also inspire the discourse and
approach of reaching ‘good health and well-being’ in the SDG efforts of Goal 3 (The
Economist, April 26, 2023). Decision scientists that are trained in systems analysis
may provide advice to individuals about discounting and their personal precaution
and prevention techniques employed. Training in systems analysis will also help to
create the right institutional settings to foster foresighted and holistic approaches to
treating patients effectively.
GOAL 4: Quality Education: ‘Quality education’ is closely related to academia.
Higher education lies at the heart of sciences. Researchers are trained to provide
quality education and sophisticated education is meant to inspire scientiﬁc discourse
and intellectual life-long advancement. Goal 4 as a mandate of ‘quality education’
is therefore closely related to science diplomacy. Science diplomats can underline
the importance and applicability of education for international growth and lasting
prosperity. Science diplomacy for quality education is one of the most interrelated
A Science Diplomacy Agenda for Sustainable Development Research
447
areas, in which research can make a positive impact on the accomplishment of the
SDGs in an actively leading role.
GOAL 5: Gender Equality: ‘Gender equality’ is one of the pledges that underline
the cross-pollination between science and the SDGs. Academia is—to this day—a
profession in which females often are less represented than their male counterparts.
Pushing for ‘gender equality’ in a concerted and standardized way through SDG
Goal 5 can therefore also advance science by advocating for bringing females into
research. At the same time, academics have a long history of embracing gender quotas
and rational efforts to include female participation. ‘Gender equality’ mandates can
learn from academic endeavors to aid female careers in sciences and apply success
factors to other domains and areas of concern, where females are falling behind
or have been left out. Especially the international outreach of scientists may aid
in transposing gender equality sentiments in countries that are currently opening up
market opportunities and liberation strategies for females, e.g., Saudi Arabia allowing
women to drive cars since 2018 and the United Arab Emirates granting citizenship
rights to a female robot that are more extensive than a human woman (The Women to
Drive Movement 2023; Mansoor 2022). These examples underline the importance of
innovative scientiﬁc approaches to open gates for females to participate in economic
and societal life in general. The positive cross-pollination may have been inspired
by academia abroad via science diplomacy and international academic exchange
channels.
GOAL 6: Clean Water and Sanitation: Goal 6 targeting ‘clean water and sanita-
tion’ can beneﬁt from science diplomacy in hard science facts about water resources
around the world, e.g., as measured by satellite imagery. Less discussed appears the
role of scientists in their prerogative of independence from industries and integrity
within market dynamics. Science diplomats may neglect power plays between coun-
tries that share water resources together, e.g., in oceans, rivers and lakes. For instance,
a concrete example where water lines and coastal areas are currently discussed is
the United Nations International Law Commission noticing a trend of countries
advocating for re-writing laws and customary sea borders in light of climate change
that will change sea levels and therefore also land and sea borders. Scientists are
among the ﬁrst to detect these trends and report and discuss these new developments
leaving aside politics and country denominations, which indicate vast differences.
For example, some countries neglect other island states territories’ sovereignty and
therefore are far from the common agreement of sea borders in the Paciﬁc Ocean.
Scientists in their independence from industry lobbying are also among the ﬁrst to
voice concern over water and sanitation quality levels in the eye of medication debris
being hard to be ﬁltered out of water in the cleaning and preservation processes. The
COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated the problem with medication consumption
skyrocketing around the world in the past years. Science can also tap its mandate
to provide innovative solutions in addressing the mentioned concerns important for
accomplishing Goal 7 in the search for ‘affordable and clean energy.’
GOAL7:AffordableandCleanEnergy:Oneofthemostvibrantlyinnovativeﬁelds
of development in light of climate change is the quest to ﬁnd ‘affordable and clean
energy’ sources around the world. Scientiﬁc discourse on energy has a long-standing
448
J. M. Puaschunder
tradition. Research on energy innovations complements the rather politically-focused
national energy interests that are often tainted by historically-contested terrains.
Scientists can hereby employ the most recent advancements, such as satellite imagery
but also clean energy solutions. In relation to global warming, the most innovative
approaches to gaining energy while also reducing climate change are the contempo-
rary advancements in ﬁltering out CO2 from the atmosphere. Science innovation and
economic market drivers are also behind ﬁnding sustainable decentralized energy
grids that would use clean energy – such as solar panels, for example—to nurture
energy reservoirs within a household. If sustainable energy is unused by a particular
household, decentralized energy grids would allow sharing of the surplus in energy
among neighbors and neighboring territories. The constant back-and-forth between
households in a common grid would enable saving energy storage and transportation
costs, which make energy inefﬁcient. All these novel advancements spring out of
hard sciences. These sustainable energy solutions’ marketability and market intro-
duction are aided by economics and ﬁnance professionals, who are often in close
contact with and inspired by scientiﬁc frontiers leaders.
GOAL 8: Decent Work and Economic Growth: Science can enlighten economic
growth with an understanding of the cyclical changes in the economy and drivers of
economic growth. Since the early 1930s, governments employ economic scientists
to understand market dynamics that transpire in the overall economy. Academics
have also been instrumental in advocating for decent work conditions. Especially
heterodox political economists have stressed the role of work relations for economic
prosperity but also the political impetus of a country.
GOAL 9: Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure: The SDG on ‘industry, innova-
tion and infrastructure’ predestines science to inform and support Public–Private-
Partnerships with integrity, scientiﬁc advancement results but also international
outreach. Oftentimes, Public–Private-Partnerships are politically-driven endeavors.
Scientists can complement national political insights and strengths with international
outlooks and additional resources that are less dependent on political voting cycles
and political stakeholders. Especially in the developing world and if governments
fail to live up to citizen social services standards, international academic exchange
and scientiﬁc research funds that are allocated for international development and
outreach can serve as a panacea to drive international growth from remote networks.
GOAL 10: Reduced Inequality: Inequality research has a long history in sciences,
in particular sociology, economics and psychology. Especially legal scholars are
trained in disparate impact analysis, which addresses the variegated impact and often
unnoticed implications of policies on certain groups. Coupling the insights of legal
scholars with systems analysis promises to open avenues to detect vulnerable groups
that are affected by inequality. Most recently, also macroeconomists have called for
a more sophisticated group-speciﬁc analysis of large-scale economic concepts, such
as longevity and prosperity (Case and Deaton 2020; Puaschunder 2022a). The socio-
economic consequences of inequality are often addressed by psychologists. Their
insights into group psychology in light of unequal outcomes within society may offer
the most valuable aid in alleviating inequality.
A Science Diplomacy Agenda for Sustainable Development Research
449
GOAL 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities: City planning and sociologically-
inspired research promise to complement traditional governmental and municipal
efforts to engage citizens in landscaping (Ostrom, 1990). Agrohoods and biophilia
trends are booming after the COVID-19 pandemic (New Hope Village and Farm
2021). Agrohoods invite communities to embrace local cooperation and collabo-
ration opportunities. Biophilia is an architectural idea to create living spaces that
resemble nature (Pearlman, 2021). In the United Nations Conferences of the Parties
(COP), most recently sustainable lifestyles have become central focal points (United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Fashion Industry
Charter, 2023). All these trends are captured and promoted by academics, who have
therefore best-starting grounds to become science diplomats to push for positive
change through sustainable cities and communities.
GOAL 12: Responsible Consumption and Production: Responsible consumption
is a trend captured in marketing and consumer behavior but also by economists and
ﬁnance scholars. Marketing and consumer behavior specialists have increasingly
noticed the democratization of consumer purchase decisions insofar as consumers are
placing their purchasing choices in line with their social values. Socio-psychological
motives of purchase acts address altruism, self-enhancement through social value
expression and transparency as favourable conditions for responsible consumption
(Puaschunder2017).Digitalizationhasheightenedtransparencyofglobalvaluechain
production standards around the globe in the most recent decades. The contemporary
trend of reshoring captures corporate endeavors to bring back production closer to
consumers for control of ethical production standards. All these novel developments
and trends are closely monitored by scientists, who also study positive conditions to
reinforce sustainable consumption patterns in modern markets and ﬁnance commu-
nities. Training scientists for diplomacy can help integrate the wisdom of science
into markets and ﬁnance in order to support the SDG on ‘responsible consumption
and production.’
GOAL 13: Climate Action: Scientists have long-standing involvement to address
the most pressing global challenges. Therefore, researchers have also been among
the ﬁrst to start noticing weather and temperature anomalies as early as dating back
to the 1950s. Scientists have been at the forefront to alert public leaders about the
lurking climate change crisis. For instance, in the United States, the U.S. National
Academy of Sciences report on global warming changed the White House policy
agenda during the George W. Bush administration. Currently, many innovative solu-
tions for climate stabilization are springing out of academic camps. For instance,
carbon capture projects, such as the Global Thermostat, which ﬁlters CO2 out from
the atmosphere in order to commercialize it for soft drinks and concrete production,
are innovations that have strong ties to academic excellence. Scientists are therefore
essential leaders in guiding innovative applied solution ﬁnding. Training in science
diplomacy skills and the worldwide acknowledgment of researchers as change agents
that can transpire into industry advancement and market innovations are hoped for
in the pursuit of Goal 15 on climate action.
GOAL 14: Life Below Water: ‘Life below water’ addresses the strength of marine
biologists and oceanographers to bundle their hard-science facts with diplomacy
450
J. M. Puaschunder
skills. Especially satellite imagery and sonographic studies to understand oceans
and marine habitats are the newest developments, where scientists team with govern-
mental ofﬁcials at the forefront of scientiﬁc innovation on ‘life below water.’ The
insights derived from these public scientist partnerships are invaluable assets to
strengthen Goal 14 of the SDGs.
GOAL 15: Life on Land: ‘Life on land’ concerns the protection, restoration and
promotion of sustainable land use. Scientists who engage in terrestrial ecosystem
management and foremost climate specialists, who study forestry, desertiﬁcation and
land degradation, may be employed as science diplomats to complement politically-
tainted national dialogues on land use. Scientists can pursue a bird-eye view in
the analysis of cross-boundary habitat protection and biodiversity loss. Aside from
industry interests and national border politics, scientists can voice natural sciences
trends. Researchers are therefore essential stakeholders to be included in the pursuit
of Goal 15 on ‘life on land.’
GOAL 16: Peace, Justice, and Strong Institutions: Political sciences and inter-
national development have a long history of focusing on peace and justice. Legal
scholars and global governance-related ﬁelds—such as public administration, public
policyandinternationalaffairs—areconcernedwithﬁndingsuccessfactorsforstrong
institutions to build stable democracies with just societies. The call for ingraining
social justice into academic settings reached unprecedented momentum during the
COVID-19 pandemic and the following age of corporate social justice (Puaschunder
2022a; Zheng 2020). It is therefore not surprising that academia and higher education
are viewed as hallmarks of social transformation. In future research and studies at
higher education institutions, the call for ingraining science diplomacy can there-
fore directly improve accomplishments in the realm of ‘peace, justice, and strong
institutions.’
GOAL 17: Partnerships to achieve the Goal: Building networks of like-minded
scholars is at the core of every ﬁeld of science. Strong intellectual partnership ties
are the gist of any larger research endeavor. Scientists with extensive networks that
transcendnationalboundariesarethereforepredestinedtoleadinthebroad-basedand
large-scale(meta)-analysis, evaluationandimplementationof theSDGs. Researchers
can tap into networks that can expand previous communication and collaboration
ﬂows onto new ventures in the SDG agenda. Science diplomacy thereby allows to
employ of fast action and sophisticated global outlooks that a grand endeavor—such
as the SDGs—will require and their impetus deserves.
8
Discussion and Conclusion
In the current quest for making the SDGs work around the globe, science diplo-
macy appears as an easily-implementable complementary approach to support global
governance leadership and executives on sustainability endeavors. Science diplo-
mats can bring in their individual ﬁelds’ strength, are oftentimes trained to think big
A Science Diplomacy Agenda for Sustainable Development Research
451
and interdisciplinarily and leave political frictions and historical national denom-
inations aside when searching for truth in the hard sciences. The global network
of science offers a broad structure to reach all parts of the world to gain diverse
international information. Yet the scientiﬁc rigor and academic conduct ensure that
a common strategy can be performed that is in line with efﬁciency, ethics and long-
term visions. Science diplomacy for sustainable development therefore appears as a
prominent avenue, yet hardly any information exists on the science diplomacy lead-
ership potential of countries as well as their individual country-strengths to enact
science diplomacy.
When it comes to the SDGs, fast action that combines top-down leadership with a
bottom-up understanding of local communities’ needs should be combined. Science
diplomacy offers the strength of a global common understanding and agree-upon
modi operandi in the respective ﬁelds. Science also can rely on long-standing estab-
lished ties and networks that allow to jump into action in the implementation of
large-scale change processes.
This chapter was meant as a ﬁrst extension of the concept of science diplomacy
on the SDG agenda. Science for SDG awareness, monitoring and implementation
holds many potentials ranging from additional funding to human capital values.
While we gained a ﬁrst understanding of the qualiﬁcation of different countries to
engage in science diplomacy successfully (Puaschunder 2023), future research may
build on the preliminary ﬁndings and elucidate concrete science diplomacy strengths
per country with particular attention to the individual starting grounds and needs of
national communities.
The ﬁrst Science Diplomacy Index was discussed in this chapter as a quantitative
evaluation of countries’ ability to employ science diplomacy in addition to national
governmentalpolicy-making.TheScienceDiplomacyIndexquantiﬁestheleadership
potential of countries to use science diplomacy as a general gateway to pursue higher
goals for the world community compared to each other. This ability to lead on long-
term global goals is crucial for sustainability, especially in the domain of climate
stabilization,whichwillrequirelarge-scalechangesinthewayhumanbeingsproduce
and consume all over the world at a rapid speed. Beyond the quantitative measuring
of countries’ ability to act for sustainability via science diplomacy, this chapter urges
to consider a following qualitative investigation of particular countries’ comparative
advantage to foster concrete science diplomacy ties and build on existing credentials
for sustainability leadership and implementation. In the international arena, research
can connect many cultures. Comparative research can also highlight differences and
underline the common denominator for nations that are ideologically far apart.
Science can also embrace stakeholders on a neutral ground and bestow negotia-
tions with integrity. Sources like research funding but also institutional ties to scien-
tists can become sanctuaries for granted hard-fact-based discussions. Systems anal-
ysis skills will prosper important insights on the viability and success of established
networks as well as allow deriving recommendations on best practices. The inter-
disciplinary, international discourse will help cross-pollination and allow deriving
best practice transplants for complex solution ﬁnding. Adding science diplomacy
452
J. M. Puaschunder
to traditional diplomatic missions and governmental policy-making therefore offers
diversity and diversiﬁcation potential with interdisciplinary value.
In the concrete employment of science diplomacy for the SDGs, one has to
admit that the idea is novel and not much institutionalized in scientiﬁc discourse
and academic practice. Granting opportunities for researchers to collaborate for the
promotion of SDGs, databases on SDG best practices and institutional support (e.g.,
chairs for SDG science diplomacy) are future developments one can hope for. Atten-
tion to unorthodox multi-disciplinary thinking and awareness for applied science
diplomacy options as well as community building are future endeavors for prospering
sustainable development through a rising cadre of responsible science diplomats.
Lastly, ethics trainings in all scientiﬁc ﬁelds (e.g., as in the case of Internal Review
Board proposal trainings) should become standardized in order to raise awareness
for the potential of granting diplomacy scientiﬁc credentials while bestowing science
with noble diplomacy spirit in accomplishing the most pressing human development
goals of our lifetimes.
References
Barston RP (2014) Modern diplomacy. Routledge, Oxon
Bartram J, Brocklehurst C, Bradley D, Muller M, Evans B (December 2018) Policy review of the
means of implementation targets and indicators for the sustainable development goal for water
and sanitation. NPJ Clean Water 1(1):3. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41545-018-0003-0
Biermann F, Hickmann T, Sénit CA (2022) The political impact of the Sustainable Development
Goals. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009082945.
009,ISBN978-1-009-08294-5
Bjola C, Kornprobst M (2018) Understanding international diplomacy: theory, practice and ethics.
Routledge, Oxon
Case A, Deaton A (2020) Death of despair and the future of capitalism. Princeton, Princeton
University Press
Constantinou CM, Kerr P, Sharp P (2016) The SAGE Handbook of Diplomacy. Los Angeles, Sage
Global Diplomacy Index. Lowy Institute. https://globaldiplomacyindex.lowyinstitute.org/country_
rank.html
Gluckman P, Quirion R, Sachs J, van Jaarsveld AS (2022) Scientiﬁc diplomacy keeps reason alight
in dark times. Nature 604(7906):425
Leibovitch A, Stremitzer A (2022) Aspirational Rules. J Leg Stud 51(2):427–454
Mansoor Z (2022) Sophia, the ﬁrst intelligent humanoid robot, to debut in Dubai: Saudi Arabia
granted her citizenship in October 2017. Gulf Business, 7 Mar 2022. https://gulfbusiness.com/
sophia-the-ﬁrst-intelligent-humanoid-robot-to-debut-in-dubai/
New Hope Village & Farm (2021) What is an Agrihood? 8 Dec 2021. https://www.newhopevilla
gefarm.com/what-is-an-agrihood
Nye JS (1990) Bound to lead: the changing nature of American power. Basic Books, New York
Ostrom E (1990) Governing the commons: the evolution of institutions for collective action.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Our World in Data. Data on CO2 and Greenhouse Gas Emissions. https://ourworldindata.org/co2-
emissions and raw data at https://github.com/owid/co2-data
Pearlman A (2021) Biophilic homes prove nature is the best medicine: Living design elements create
a serene, multisensory, healing experience. https://neo.life/2020/12/biophilic-homes-prove-nat
ure-is-the-best-medicine/
A Science Diplomacy Agenda for Sustainable Development Research
453
Pierce A (2018) Why SDG 17 is the most important UN SDG? https://www.sopact.com/perspecti
ves/sdg17-most-important-sdg
Puaschunder JM (2017) Socio-psychological motives of socially responsible investors. Glob CG:
Adv Financ Econ 19:209–247
Puaschunder JM (2020a) Behavioral economics and ﬁnance leadership: nudging and winking to
make better choices. Springer, Cham
Puaschunder JM (2020b) Governance and climate justice: global south and developing nations.
Palgrave Macmillan, New York
Puaschunder JM (2022a) Ethics of inclusion: The cases of Health, Economics, Education, Digi-
talization and the Environment in the post-COVID-19 Era. Bury Saint Edmunds, Ethics
International
Puaschunder JM (2022b) Health Capital and Health Wealth. In: Proceedings of the 29th international
RAIS conference on social sciences and humanities organized by the research association for
interdisciplinary studies (RAIS), 8–15, Princeton, US, 14 Aug 2022. http://rais.education/wp-
content/uploads/2022/09/0210.pdf
Puaschunder JM (2022c) Science diplomacy index: leadership and responsibility to act on climate
change. Scientia Moralitas: Int J Multidisip Res 7(2):11–30
Puaschunder JM (2023) The future of resilient ﬁnance: ﬁnance politics in the age of sustainable
development. Palgrave, New York
Sharp P (2016) Domestic public diplomacy, domestic diplomacy, and domestic foreign policy: The
transformation of foreign policy. Oxford University Press, Oxford
Sustainable Development Goals (2022) Decade of Action. https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelop
ment/decade-of-action/
Szkarłat M (2020) Science diplomacy of Poland. Hum Social Sci Commn 7(1):1–10
The Economist (2023) Too many people take too many pills: Medical systems are set up to put
people on drugs, not take them, 26 Apr 2023. https://www.economist.com/science-and-techno
logy/2023/04/26/too-many-people-take-too-many-pills
The Vienna Statement on Science Diplomacy, International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
(IIASA). Laxenburg, Austria, European Union. https://iiasa.ac.at/network-with-us/vienna-sta
tement-on-science-diplomacy
The Women to Drive Movement. https://oct26driving.com/
United Nations (2017) Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 6 July 2017. New York,
United Nations. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:A_RES_71_313_E.pdf
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Sustainable Development. https://sdgs.
un.org/goals
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Charter for Sustainable
Fashion (2023) Progress Report. New York, United Nations. https://unfccc.int/sites/default/
ﬁles/resource/230329%20BLS23055%20UCC%20Climate%20Action%202023%20v06.pdf
Webometrics. Ranking Web of Universities. https://www.webometrics.info/en/distribution_by_cou
ntry
Whitten JL, Bentle LD (2007) Systems analysis and design for the global enterprise. Graw-Hill,
London
World Bank. Educational attainment, at least Bachelor’s or equivalent, population 25+, total (%)
(cumulative). https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.TER.CUAT.BA.ZS
Zheng L (2020) We are entering the age of Corporate Social Justice. Harv Bus Rev, 15 June 15
2020. https://hbr.org/2020/06/were-entering-the-age-of-corporate-social-justice
A Systematic Review of Curriculum
and Its Connections with Education
for Sustainable Development
in the Context of Pakistan
Madiha Khadim
Abstract The connection between what students learn in universities and the ideas
of Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) is really important in Pakistan.
This is because it helps to solve problems about taking care of our environment and
society that we face today, and it also teaches students how to keep doing good things
for the future. The chapter talks about some main points about how the curriculum
is connected to ESD in Pakistan. The curriculum is important for the issues that
Pakistan deals with, it suggests that learners should learn from different subjects,
it talks about getting better at certain skills, it suggests that traditional knowledge
and culture should be part of the curriculum. Further, this chapter is about training
teachers, getting the community involved, and it talks about being good and fair when
it comes to taking care of the Earth and our society. By adding the ideas of ESD into
whatlearnerslearnineducationalinstitutessuchascollegesanduniversities.Pakistan
can help students become people who care about the environment and society, and
who make choices that help the country be better and more sustainable.
Keywords Curriculum · Education for sustainable development · Pakistan
1
Introduction
Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) is a way that people all around the
world agree on to help make the world better and long-lasting. In order to foster
sustainable societies. We should teach through a curriculum about how to take care
of the planet and society. Many countries, like Pakistan, the USA, the UK, Germany,
Japan, Singapore, and Sweden, follow the ESD agenda. They are trying to put ESD
agenda into what they teach. In this chapter, I will look at all the literature on the
connections between curriculum and ESD in the context of Pakistan.
M. Khadim (B)
Lecturer at GCWUF, Punjab, Pakistan
e-mail: madihakhadim@gcwuf.edu.pk
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_26
455
456
M. Khadim
A curriculum means a well-organized plan of different courses, teaching tools, and
learning activities made to reach certain educational aims. Education for Sustainable
Development(ESD)isawayoflearningthatlooksateverythingtogetherandinvolves
many subjects. It wants to make the world better in terms of the environment, society,
and money. The link between curriculum and ESD is very important. This is because
the curriculum decides what is taught in schools and colleges and also affects what
students learn in terms of facts, abilities, feelings, and what they believe in.
The curriculum is the fundamental element of any education system because it’s
the base for teaching and learning. In Pakistan, the National Curriculum of Education
is the guiding system. We can say that a guidebook or a curriculum tells teachers
what to teach at different levels of education. Some studies have looked at how this
curriculum can help with Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) (Zguir et al.
2021). For example, they found that the curriculum for primary and secondary school
talks about things like taking care of the environment and making things last longer.
This is a good starting point to add ESD into what students learn. But there are also
studies by Sund and Gericke (2020) that show some problems. They say that the
curriculum doesn’t cover all the important ideas of ESD, and it doesn’t focus enough
on thinking critically, solving problems, and learning by doing together. These are
all really important components of ESD. The curriculum has not fully covered the
17 SDGs still the lack exists. Although, Teachers play a crucial role in implementing
ESD in the classroom, and their knowledge, skills, and attitudes are key factors in
determining the success of ESD initiatives.
The pre-service teacher education programs in Pakistan do not adequately cover
ESD concepts and pedagogies, and there is a need for in-service professional devel-
opment programs to enhance teachers’ understanding of ESD and their ability to
integrate it into their teaching practices. Additionally, studies have emphasized the
importance of promoting teachers’ ownership and agency in ESD implementation
and involving them in curriculum development processes.
In the context of Pakistan, many studies have highlighted the lack and need for
teacher education and professional development programs that speciﬁcally focus on
ESD. Existing literature suggestions are given below:
A Systematic Review of Curriculum and Its Connections with Education …
457
Researcher
Year
Title
Findings
Shahid Hussain
Mughal, Dr.Nasim
Qaisrani, Ghulam
Mohuyuddin
Solangi, and
Sumaira Faiz
2011
Promoting
Education for
Sustainable
Development:
Challenges and
Issues for Higher
Education
Institutions in
Pakistan
The concepts of environment and
sustainable development have received
minimal attention at the higher education
level. Pakistan faces an urgent need to
realign its education system and curriculum
with the principles of sustainable
development. To address this imperative, it
is essential to enhance and fortify the
educational curricula at all levels. This will
facilitate the development of informed
individuals who not only understand but
also actively engage in the principles and
practices of sustainable development
Qudsia Kalsoom,
Naima Qureshi and
Aﬁfa Khanam
2018
Perceptions of the
Research Scholars
Regarding Education
for Sustainable
Development (ESD)
in Pakistan
Education for Sustainable Development
(ESD) remains marginalized in both primary
and tertiary education within Pakistan. In
November 2016, the Institute of Education
at Lahore College for Women University,
Pakistan, took the initiative to organize an
international conference titled “Building
Knowledge Competencies for Sustainable
Development (SD) in Asia: Achieving the
Goals of Life-Long Learning.“ The
conference garnered signiﬁcant attention,
receiving a total of ninety-two paper
abstracts. However, it is noteworthy that
only a limited number of articles directly
tackled research issues pertaining to ESD
Ayaz Muhammad
Khan, Amber
Jamshaid and
Amna Ramzan
2019
Educators, As
Agents of
Sustainable
Development in
Pakistan
The research ﬁndings revealed a
considerable untapped potential among
teachers to serve as agents of sustainability.
Despite lacking awareness of the term
“sustainability,” a signiﬁcant number of
teachers had been unknowingly teaching the
concept of sustainable development over an
extended period of time, partly inﬂuenced
by the curriculum. However, the study
identiﬁed numerous challenges and
obstacles faced by the majority of the
teachers. These challenges included a dearth
of resources and inadequate support from
both the administration and society at large.
Nonetheless, the educators expressed a
shared belief that determination and
resourcefulness were essential qualities
required to effectively carry out their roles
as agents for sustainable development
(continued)
458
M. Khadim
(continued)
Researcher
Year
Title
Findings
Durrani, Malik,
and Jumani
2019
Education for
Sustainable
Development (ESD)
in Pre-Service
Teachers Education
Curriculum in
Pakistan: Current
Status and Future
Directions
There is a need for teacher education and
professional development programs that
speciﬁcally focus on ESD
Naila Zarar,
Muqaddas Butt,
and Aatika Aziz
2020
Investigate the
sustainability
principles embedded
in the secondary
school biology
curriculum
The study ﬁndings indicated that integrating
sustainability into the secondary school
Biology curriculum resulted in improved
organization, coordination, and formality.
However, there is a requirement to place
more emphasis on the memorization and
retention of relevant material, themes, and
details. Additionally, the limited sections of
the biology curriculum fail to address the
social and economic aspects, while practical
experimentation and application of the
written content are overlooked
Madiha Khadim,
Naima Qureshi and
Ayaz Muhammad
Khan
2021
Content Analysis of
National Education
Policy 2017:
Educational
Exertions Towards
Education for
Sustainable
Development in
Pakistan
It is imperative to foster awareness and
sensitivity toward the holistic environment
and its interconnected challenges. This
necessitates acquiring fundamental
knowledge concerning the environment, its
associated predicaments, and the signiﬁcant
presence and inﬂuence of humanity within
it. Furthermore, the development of skills
and expertise aimed at anticipating,
preventing, and resolving environmental
issues is essential. A crucial aspect is the
cultivation of the capacity to contribute to
and assess environmental policies,
initiatives, and programs. Ultimately,
fostering a sense of responsibility and
urgency is crucial, instilling a commitment
to direct engagement inappropriate actions
(continued)
A Systematic Review of Curriculum and Its Connections with Education …
459
(continued)
Researcher
Year
Title
Findings
Madiha Khadim,
Naima Qureshi and
Ayaz Muhammad
Khan
2022
Challenges of
Implementing
Education for
Sustainable
Development:
University Teachers’
Perspectives
Teacher educators encounter numerous
challenges when it comes to integrating
sustainability knowledge into pre-service
teacher education. These challenges
encompass a lack of commitment from
students, inadequate support from
management, limited time availability, and a
scarcity of instructional resources.
Additionally, the existing curriculum often
emphasizes narrow-focused courses,
hindering the seamless integration of
sustainability concepts among future
educators
Despite dedicated efforts to incorporate Education for Sustainable Development
(ESD) into the curriculum in Pakistan, scholarly literature has identiﬁed various
challenges that impede its effective implementation (Khadim et al. 2022). These
challenges encompass issues surrounding policy execution, a lack of awareness and
comprehension of ESD among teachers, students, and parents, inadequate avail-
ability of teaching and learning resources, and insufﬁcient support for participatory
and experiential learning approaches. Moreover, socio-cultural factors, including
conventional teaching methods and limited opportunities for student engagement,
have been recognized as barriers to the successful integration of ESD. However, there
are also opportunities for endorsing ESD in the curriculum of Pakistan. For instance,
research suggests that integrating ESD into existing curricula and leveraging local
knowledge, values, and practices can enhance relevance and engagement among
students. Additionally, partnerships among government, academia, civil society, and
other stakeholders can foster multi-sectoral collaboration and support ESD imple-
mentation. Moreover, using innovative pedagogies, such as problem-based learning,
outdoor and experiential learning, and the use of ICT tools, can create effective
learning experiences for students and promote ESD principles.
2
Curriculum and Its Connections with ESD in Pakistan
ESD (Education for Sustainable Development) is a holistic approach to education that
aims to promote sustainable development by equipping students with the knowledge,
skills, values, and attitudes necessary to address social, economic, and environmental
challenges (Leicht et al. 2018). In Pakistan, the idea of including ESD in education
is becoming more important because the country has problems like the environment
getting worse, climate change, not having enough money, and people not being
treated fairly (Bourn et al. 2023). The curriculum is really important for making ESD
happen in Pakistan’s education system. The curriculum creates a structure for what is
460
M. Khadim
taught in schools and outlines what students are expected to learn (Mirza 2020). The
curriculum needs to include current and ﬁtting information about sustainability. This
means adding things from environmental science, social studies, economics, and how
to act ethically. Some examples are climate change, different kinds of living things,
fair treatment for people, doing the right thing when using things, and dealing with
waste (Zguir et al. 2021). When sustainability ideas are put into different subjects
and for different grades, students can see how things like society, money, and the
environment are all connected (Eli et al. 2020).
Research discovered that the curriculum needs to focus on teaching methods
where students are involved and do things to learn. This can mean learning by asking
questions, solving problems, thinking deeply, and working on projects that connect
with real life (Orlovic et al. 2020). Another study found that ways of teaching that
push students to think really carefully, understand hard problems, and do something
about them help them understand sustainability better and how it matters in their lives
and where they live (Bascopé et al. 2019). Moreover, the curriculum must encourage
beliefs and ways of thinking that match with sustainability ideas. These can include
treating differences with respect, understanding others’ feelings, caring for others,
taking responsibility, and making good choices based on what’s right. This can be
done by teaching these values clearly and also by making a good atmosphere for
learning, where students feel like they can do things and have the power to make a
difference in the world and where they live (Alam 2022).
The curriculum needs to show how things locally and around the world are
connected. It should make students think deeply about how what they do can affect
things in different ways. This can mean learning about problems close by with the
environment and people, but also looking at big issues like poor living conditions,
unfairness, climate change, and goals for making the world better (Khalid et al.
2021). When students grasp how things are linked both near and far, they start seeing
the bigger picture and feeling like they’re part of the whole world, which helps them
look at making the world better in a bigger and more organized way.
The curriculum should let students get involved in their neighborhoods and do
things to solve problems about sustainability. This could mean helping out in the
community, going on trips to see things in person, working with local groups, and
doing projects together that help the real world and make things better where they
live (Hadjichambis and Paraskeva-Hadjichambi 2020). When students take part in
the community, they feel like they’re part of it and it’s their job to take care of it, and
they also feel like they have a say in how things work and can help change things for
the better.
The National Education Policy of Pakistan gives a lot of importance to including
ESD in all levels of education, starting from primary to higher education. The policy
says it’s really important to teach things about taking care of the environment, being
fairtoeveryone,andmakingthecountrybetterbyteachingteachershowtodothisand
also by making the curriculum better (Khadim et al. 2021). Pakistan is committed
to achieving the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). These
goals help to look at the big picture and ﬁx problems all around the world (Khadim
et al. 2022). Putting these goals into what students learn is a great way to teach ESD
A Systematic Review of Curriculum and Its Connections with Education …
461
in Pakistan. The curriculum can be designed to align with the SDGs, and they can
include important ideas, topics, and problems that have to do with making the world
better and long-lasting.
Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) is woven into different subjects
including science, social studies, geography, and agriculture, among others. For
instance, in science classes, students delve into subjects like protecting the envi-
ronment, understanding climate change, and exploring renewable energy sources.
In social studies, students investigate matters like poverty, gender equality, and
social justice. In Pakistan, the curriculum is carefully crafted to seamlessly inte-
grate ESD principles, skills, and values into speciﬁc learning goals, evaluations, and
tasks corresponding to each subject (Nousheen et al. 2020).
ESD emphasizes interactive and hands-on learning methods that encourage
thinking critically, solving problems, and taking an active role. The curriculum can
include chances for students to take part in real-world learning experiences that
involve asking questions and are connected to their local surroundings, like going
on trips, doing projects in the community, and working together (Alam 2022). These
experiences where you learn by doing can help students really understand problems
about sustainability and get good at dealing with them. ESD also teaches important
values like understanding others, treating everything with respect, and doing the right
thing for the world and the people in it. The curriculum can help these values grow
by using things like stories, acting things out, and talking (Bosio and Schattle 2021).
And on top of that, the curriculum can help students feel like they can make things
happen and feel hopeful and interested in making the world better in terms of society
and the environment.
Educators hold a crucial position in advancing ESD within the educational frame-
work. The curriculum can outline arrangements for training programs designed to
elevate teachers’ expertise in ESD concepts, teaching strategies, and evaluation tech-
niques. These initiatives can empower teachers to seamlessly incorporate ESD into
their instructional methods and champion sustainability education in their classrooms
(Olmos-Gómez et al. 2019).
The curriculum has a pivotal role in advancing Education for Sustainable Devel-
opment (ESD) in Pakistan’s education system. By infusing ESD principles, skills,
values, and mindsets into the curriculum, Pakistan can nurture a generation of
students well-prepared to comprehend and tackle the sustainability issues that
confront their nation and the wider world. The curriculum’s signiﬁcance in shaping
education for sustainable development is profound, as it establishes the ground-
work for what is taught, how it is taught, and the values and outlooks that are
cultivated. Through the integration of sustainability concepts into the curriculum,
utilization of interactive teaching methodologies, endorsement of values harmo-
nious with sustainability, emphasis on both local and global perspectives, and the
promotion of community engagement, education for sustainable development can
be seamlessly embedded within educational structures. This integration empowers
students to evolve as knowledgeable and engaged global citizens who contribute
constructively towards a more sustainable future.
462
M. Khadim
3
Literature Review
The importance of Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) in Pakistan is
increasingly acknowledged due to the country’s various sustainability challenges.
The incorporation of ESD within Pakistan’s education curriculum has been a subject
of research and deliberation. An examination of existing literature unveils several
central themes and discoveries regarding the interrelation of the curriculum with
ESD in Pakistan. The National Curriculum Policy of Pakistan underscores the infu-
sion of ESD throughout all education tiers. Various frameworks, like the National
Education Policy 2017–2025 and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), estab-
lish a policy structure to advance ESD within the curriculum (Hinduja et al. 2023).
Nonetheless, there exists a necessity for further harmonization and integration of
ESD ideas, abilities, and principles within the prevailing curriculum documents and
policy frameworks (Saqib et al. 2020).
Research indicates that incorporating Education for Sustainable Development
(ESD) into speciﬁc subjects within the curriculum can effectively enhance sustain-
ability education in Pakistan (Rashid, 2019). For instance, investigations have exam-
ined the integration of ESD principles into subjects like science, social studies, geog-
raphy, and agriculture. This integration can be accomplished by infusing pertinent
sustainability ideas, themes, and concerns into the curriculum and aligning them with
the intended learning outcomes and evaluations (Malik et al. 2019). Approaches
involving hands-on learning experiences, such as ﬁeld trips, community projects,
and interactive activities, have been recognized as productive teaching methods
for promoting ESD within Pakistan’s educational framework (Alam 2022). These
methodologies offer students chances to partake in real-life, contextual learning
situations that foster analytical thinking, problem-solving, and active involvement.
A research study proposed that instilling values and mindsets connected to sustain-
ability forms an essential facet of incorporating Education for Sustainable Devel-
opment (ESD) within the curriculum (Nousheen et al. 2020). This encompasses
nurturing values like empathy, respect, and obligation towards the environment,
society, and the forthcoming generations. The curriculum can endorse these values
through narratives, role-playing, and discussions, and by integrating afﬁrmative
attitudes towards sustainability, such as a feeling of empowerment and commit-
ment to societal and environmental matters (Khanum 2019). However, educators
play a pivotal role in advancing ESD within the curriculum. Zguir et al. (2021)
underscore the signiﬁcance of teacher training initiatives that furnish educators
with opportunities for professional growth, enhancing their comprehension of ESD
concepts, instructional methodologies, and evaluation techniques. Another study
accentuated that teacher training can effectively facilitate the integration of ESD into
teachingpracticesandpromotesustainabilityeducationintheclassroom(Khalidetal.
2021). Scholarly literature highlights obstacles in embedding ESD into Pakistan’s
curriculum, includingissues likelimitedawareness, insufﬁcient resources, andadher-
ence to conventional teaching methods (Asif et al. 2019; Khadim et al. 2022).
Khadim et al. (2022) underscore the signiﬁcance of certain suggestions from their
A Systematic Review of Curriculum and Its Connections with Education …
463
study, including the necessity for policy backing, enhancing teachers’ capabilities,
revising the curriculum, and involving various stakeholders to ensure the successful
incorporation of ESD into the curriculum.
To conclude, the examination of the literature underscores the pivotal role of
the curriculum in advancing Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) within
Pakistan’s education framework. The incorporation of subject-speciﬁc integration,
experiential learning, cultivation of values and attitudes, and robust teacher training
emerges as signiﬁcant factors that enhance the nexus between the curriculum and
ESD (Lorente-Echeverría et al., 2022). Overcoming challenges and implementing
recommended strategies can effectively facilitate the integration of ESD into the
curriculum, enabling students to acquire the requisite knowledge, skills, values, and
attitudes for addressing sustainability challenges prevalent in Pakistan. Notably,
Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) constitutes a critical avenue for
addressing sustainability issues and instilling sustainable behaviors among students.
Correspondingly, the curriculum occupies a central role in embedding ESD princi-
ples into the educational domain (Colomer et al., 2021). This systematic review of
literature has sought to delve into the interrelation between the curriculum and ESD
within the context of Pakistan.
The systematic exploration and evaluation of academic databases, journals, and
reports enable the review to pinpoint pertinent literature. Noteworthy are the ﬁndings
of Nousheen’s research in 2020, which underscore vital themes regarding the inter-
play between Pakistan’s curriculum and Education for Sustainable Development
(ESD). These themes encompass the curriculum’s alignment with local sustain-
ability challenges, the embrace of an interdisciplinary methodology, the fostering
of skill sets, incorporation of indigenous knowledge and cultural heritage, enhance-
ment of teacher training and competence, establishment of community involvement
and collaborations, as well as ethical considerations tied to sustainability (Saud and
Ashfaq 2022). The scrutiny of existing literature demonstrates a progressive recogni-
tion of ESD’s signiﬁcance within Pakistan’s curriculum. Endeavors are underway to
infuse sustainable concepts across various subjects and educational levels. Neverthe-
less, gaps persist, andchallenges remaininthecomprehensiveintegrationof ESDinto
the curriculum. Such challenges encompass the demand for more context-appropriate
approaches, heightened investment in teacher training and skill development, and the
forging of robust community engagement and partnerships (Bourn et al. 2017).
The systematic literature review’s ﬁndings have contributed signiﬁcantly to
enhancing comprehension of the present situation and hurdles involved in integrating
ESD into Pakistan’s curriculum. This study offers crucial insights that can guide
policymakers, educators, and researchers in formulating and executing more potent
strategies to embed ESD principles effectively within the curriculum. This, in turn,
will nurture sustainability understanding, skill reﬁnement, and conscientious citizen-
ship among Pakistani students (Zhang et al. 2020). To further cement the relationship
between the curriculum and ESD in Pakistan and to advance sustainable develop-
ment in the nation, additional research and concerted endeavors are indispensable
(Corres et al. 2020; Mirza 2020; Rieckmann 2018).
464
M. Khadim
4
Analysis
The present systematic review was conducted following the methodological frame-
works introduced by Fink (2020) and Barth and Rieckmann (2018). As explicitly
articulated in the introductory section, the primary aim of this review was to compre-
hensively investigate the extant body of literature concerning the interrelationships
existing between curriculum and education for sustainable development. To ensure
the capture of pertinent research within a contemporary temporal scope, a deliberate
selection was made of a literature sample spanning a duration of seven years for
detailed analysis (Fig. 1).
To conduct the analysis, recent research studies from the preceding seven years
(2017–2023) were employed. These studies underscore the interrelationship between
Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) and curriculum. The systematic
reviewexaminationofthenexusbetweencurriculumandESDinthePakistanicontext
brings forth a number of distinct themes:
5
Theme 1
Relevance to local sustainability challenges: Most studies have found that the
curriculum in Pakistan should address local sustainability challenges such as water
scarcity, air pollution, deforestation and climate change. It should include relevant
and context-speciﬁc examples and case studies to make the material meaningful and
applicable to local contexts. It can help students understand environmental, social,
and economic issues facing their communities and develop solutions for sustainable
development.
6
Theme 2
Interdisciplinary approach: ESD requires an interdisciplinary approach that goes
beyond traditional subject boundaries. The curriculum should integrate different
disciplines such as science, social sciences, economics, and ethics to provide a
comprehensive understanding of sustainability issues. It can help students develop a
comprehensive and integrated view of sustainability, recognizing the interconnect-
edness of environmental, social, and economic aspects.
A Systematic Review of Curriculum and Its Connections with Education …
465
7
Theme 3
Skills development: ESD emphasizes the development of skills necessary for
sustainable living, such as critical thinking, problem-solving, collaboration, and
communication. The curriculum should include opportunities for students to develop
theseskillsthroughhands-onactivities,groupprojects,andreal-worldapplications.It
canempowerstudentstobecomeactiveagentsofchangeandcontributetosustainable
development efforts in their communities.
8
Theme 4
Incorporation of local knowledge and cultural heritage: The curriculum should
recognize and incorporate indigenous knowledge and cultural heritage, as they play
an important role in sustainable development. Traditional environmental knowl-
edge, local practices, and cultural values can provide valuable insights and solutions
to address local sustainability challenges. The curriculum should promote respect
for diverse cultures and encourage students to learn from and appreciate their own
heritage.
9
Theme 5
Teacher training and capacity building: Teachers play an important role in effec-
tively delivering ESD. The curriculum should include provision for teacher training
and enhancement of ESD concepts, procedures, and teaching skills. Teachers must
be equipped with the necessary knowledge, skills, and resources to effectively inte-
grate ESD into their teaching practices and create a supportive learning environment
for students.
10
Theme 6
Community engagement and partnerships: ESD is not limited to classroom
learning. It should also include active engagement with the local community and
partnerships with relevant stakeholders. The curriculum should encourage students
to engage in community-based projects, ﬁeld trips, and collaborative initiatives that
allow them to work with the community to address sustainability challenges. This
can help students develop a sense of responsibility towards their community and
promote a culture of sustainability.
466
M. Khadim
11
Ethical Considerations
ESD emphasizes the importance of ethical considerations in decision-making and
sustainability initiatives. The curriculum should raise awareness of ethical issues,
such as environmental justice, social equity, and interracial equality. It should
instill in students the values of empathy, responsibility, and ethical decision-making,
encouraging them to think critically and consider the ethical implications of their
actions.
12
Limitations
The recent research has several limitations. First, the small sample size of the papers
included in this review (29) may limit the generalizability of our ﬁndings. Only arti-
cles published in the English language were considered, which may have resulted in
potential language bias and excluded relevant research published in other languages.
Additionally, I acknowledge that my search may have missed articles published in
journals that do not speciﬁcally focus on education for sustainable development
(ESD), which could have provided valuable insight into the topic. Furthermore,
the ﬁndings are context-speciﬁc as they are based on curriculum and education for
sustainable development practices in the speciﬁc context of Pakistan. It is important
to recognize that curricula vary across countries, and the results of this review may
not be directly applicable to other educational contexts with different curriculum
frameworks.
Another limitation is that I identiﬁed different terms used for curriculum and
ESD in the literature, which may have led to potential inconsistencies or gaps in our
search results. I was unable to examine the authors’ reasons for using particular terms
and the implications of such word choices for the content and focus of the articles.
Despite these limitations, our systematic review provides valuable insights into the
relationship between curriculum and education for sustainable development in the
context of Pakistan. Future research should consider a wider range of literature,
including research from different languages and diverse educational contexts, to
further enrich understanding of this topic.
13
Discussion
Establishing a strong connection between the curriculum and Education for Sustain-
able Development (ESD) is of paramount signiﬁcance in Pakistan, as it fosters
sustainable behaviors and tackles prevailing sustainability issues. The curriculum
is the bedrock upon which students’ knowledge, attitudes, and conduct are shaped.
The integration of ESD principles into the curriculum carries the potential for lasting
A Systematic Review of Curriculum and Its Connections with Education …
467
inﬂuence, nurturing individuals who are environmentally aware and socially respon-
sible over the long term. Empirical ﬁndings underscore the pivotal role of the
curriculuminincorporatingESDwithinPakistan’seducationallandscape.Itiscrucial
that the curriculum addresses local sustainability challenges, adopts an interdisci-
plinary approach, emphasizes skill development, incorporates indigenous wisdom
and cultural heritage, invests in teacher training and capacity enhancement, encour-
ages community engagement and partnerships, instills motivation, and underscores
ethical considerations. By weaving ESD principles into the curriculum, Pakistan
can equip its students to evolve into conscientious stewards of the environment
and socially cognizant citizens, primed to contribute to the nation’s journey toward
sustainable development.
The curriculum’s design should be geared towards tackling local sustainability
issues confronting Pakistan, encompassing concerns like climate change, water
scarcity, deforestation, pollution, and societal disparities. By incorporating perti-
nent local instances and case studies, the curriculum can elucidate the applicability
of sustainability principles within students’ immediate surroundings and communi-
ties. This approach can galvanize them to enact positive changes to counter these
challenges. Furthermore, it’s imperative to acknowledge that ESD necessitates an
interdisciplinary strategy, given the intricate and interconnected nature of sustain-
ability problems. The curriculum should surpass traditional subject divisions and
incorporate sustainability principles across diverse disciplines, spanning sciences,
social sciences, business studies, and the humanities. Such an approach facilitates
the cultivation of a comprehensive grasp of sustainability, fostering interdisciplinary
thought processes crucial for innovative solutions to sustainability challenges.
ESD places emphasis on honing competencies like critical thinking, problem-
solving, communication, and collaboration, all of which are indispensable for
addressing sustainability issues. The curriculum should prioritize skills develop-
ment through hands-on learning techniques that prompt students to dissect real-world
sustainability predicaments, proffer solutions, and engage actively in learning activ-
ities. This pedagogical approach can empower students to be proactive catalysts of
change and contribute effectively to sustainable development endeavors.
Pakistan’s rich cultural legacy and native knowledge systems hold the potential to
contribute signiﬁcantly to sustainable development. In light of this, it is advisable for
the curriculum to acknowledge and incorporate local wisdom and cultural heritage.
Thisintegrationcanserveasaplatformtohighlighttraditionalsustainabilitypractices
and local insights. Consequently, students can attain a deeper grasp of their cultural
heritage, cultivate an appreciation for local sustainability approaches, and nurture a
sense of cultural identity and pride.
In any educational framework, educators wield considerable inﬂuence in imple-
menting Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) within classrooms. Conse-
quently, it becomes imperative to provide teachers with structured training and
capacity-building opportunities. This approach aids in enhancing their comprehen-
sion of ESD principles, pedagogical techniques, and sustainability concepts. Such
468
M. Khadim
efforts empower teachers to seamlessly integrate ESD into their instructional method-
ologies, thereby sparking enthusiasm among students to adopt environmentally
responsible attitudes and conscientious societal engagement.
Incorporating Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) should involve
collaborating with local communities, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and
other invested parties. This collaboration is crucial for fostering a sense of ownership
at the grassroots level and instigating sustainable behaviors. The curriculum should
provide occasions for students to interact with local communities, partake in projects
based within the community, and cooperate with stakeholders. Through these inter-
actions, students can develop an understanding of local sustainability concerns and
jointly generate solutions. This approach facilitates the cultivation of a sense of civic
duty, prompting students to become proactive contributors within their communi-
ties. Additionally, ESD underscores the ethical facets of sustainability, encompassing
social justice, equity, and human rights. Within the curriculum, students should be
encouraged to critically evaluate ethical predicaments tied to sustainability chal-
lenges and nurture a commitment to rectifying social and environmental imbalances.
Such pedagogical practices can instill values of empathy, compassion, and impar-
tiality—essential attributes for establishing an equitable and sustainable society. By
infusing ESD principles into the curriculum, Pakistan has the potential to foster a
generation of informed and accountable citizens, adept at confronting sustainability
issues and contributing to the nation’s drive for sustainable development.
14
Conclusion
It is concluded that the relationship between curriculum and Education for Sustain-
able Development (ESD) in Pakistan is important in promoting sustainable prac-
tices, addressing local sustainability challenges, and training students to be environ-
mentally responsible and socially conscious citizens. is important. Its preparation
is very important. By integrating ESD principles into the curriculum, Pakistan can
promote sustainable literacy, skills development, and values of empathy and respon-
sibility among students, which will ultimately contribute to the country’s sustainable
development efforts and create a more sustainable future.
15
Recommendations
Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) is an important concept that focuses
on integrating sustainability principles into the education system. In Pakistan, to
promote ESD, it is crucial to align the curriculum with the Sustainable Development
Goals and integrate sustainability concepts across different subject areas. Here are
some recommendations for curriculum development in Pakistan and its relationship
with ESD:
A Systematic Review of Curriculum and Its Connections with Education …
469
InclusionofESDprinciplesintheNationalCurriculum:ESDprinciplesshould
be integrated into Pakistan’s educational framework across all tiers, spanning from
primary to advanced education. This integration can be realized by infusing ideas
like safeguarding the environment, societal accountability, and economic durability
into the curricula of diverse subjects, encompassing disciplines like science, social
studies, and business studies.
Incorporation of local and global perspectives: Incorporating both local and
worldwide viewpoints on sustainable development is essential within the curriculum.
Achieving this involves integrating instances and analyses from Pakistan as well
as other nations to underscore how local and global sustainability difﬁculties are
interconnected. This approach aids students in cultivating a more comprehensive
comprehension of sustainability concerns and their intricate associations.
Development of critical thinking and problem-solving skills: Education for
Sustainable Development (ESD) ought to prioritize nurturing critical thinking and the
capacity to solve problems among students. The curriculum should encompass tasks
and undertakings that motivate students to scrutinize tangible sustainability issues
and recommend remedies. This approach will empower students to take proactive
roles in effecting change and lend their contributions to Pakistan’s endeavors toward
sustainable development.
Promotion of active learning and participatory approaches: The way students
learn should focus on doing things rather than just listening. Methods like asking
questions, solving problems, and working on projects can help students learn by
experiencing things themselves. Getting students to talk in groups, argue their ideas,
and work together on projects can also make learning more exciting. This kind of
learning helps students get involved and feel like they’re really a part of understanding
and solving problems about taking care of our world.
Integration of cross-cutting themes: It’s really important to include big ideas
like climate change, saving different plants and animals, making sure boys and girls
have the same opportunities, and treating everyone fairly in what students learn.
These big ideas show that problems about taking care of our world are complicated
and have many sides. It’s super important that these big ideas are part of different
subjects student’s study. This way, students can really understand all about taking
care of the world and learn to think about problems in different ways.
Teacher training and capacity building: Teachers have a really important job in
teaching about taking care of our world. So, it’s necessary to give them training and
chances to learn more about how to teach these ideas and ways of thinking. This can
be done by having workshops, meetings, and programs where they can learn and get
better at what they do.
Engagement of local communities and stakeholders: Education for Sustainable
Development (ESD) should collaborate with local communities and those interested
in the matter to develop a feeling of responsibility and encourage lasting eco-friendly
behaviors within the immediate area. The educational plan should offer chances
for students to connect with local communities, non-governmental organizations
470
M. Khadim
Database search
Peer reviewed Journals 
(2017-2023) 
Initial Screening 
Experts review
Identification and 
implementation of serach 
terms "Connection of ESD 
and Curriculum"
Read full text artilces for 
further exclusion
Finalized relevant articles 
Fig. 1 Processing strategy
(NGOs), and other stakeholders. This interaction would allow students to compre-
hend issues regarding sustainability by working together, brainstorm ways to tackle
these challenges.
Integration of indigenous knowledge and cultural heritage: Pakistan possesses
a diverse cultural legacy and native knowledge systems that can play a role in
advancing sustainable progress. To harness this potential, the curriculum should
acknowledge and blend indigenous knowledge and cultural heritage. By doing so,
the curriculum can spotlight local insights and customary methods associated with
sustainability.
16
Future Research Direction
Although existing studies shed light on how the curriculum and Education for
Sustainable Development (ESD) relate in Pakistan, there remain gaps in research
that require attention. These gaps encompass aspects like the necessity for practical
investigations to evaluate how well ESD is put into practice in classrooms, the effects
of ESD on students’ understanding, abilities, and viewpoints, as well as the inﬂuence
of local factors on how ESD is carried out in Pakistan. Additionally, there is a dearth
of research concerning teacher training and the development of skills for ESD, along
with strategies to overcome challenges tied to implementing ESD in the Pakistani
context.
A Systematic Review of Curriculum and Its Connections with Education …
471
References
Alam A (2022) Mapping a sustainable future through the conceptualization of transformative
learning framework, education for sustainable development, critical reﬂection, and respon-
sible citizenship: an exploration of pedagogies for twenty-ﬁrst-century learning. ECS Trans
107(1):9827
Asif F (2019) Redeﬁning and localizing development in Pakistan. In Better Spending for Localizing
Global Sustainable Development Goals. Routledge, pp. 107–120 .
Asif T, Guangming O, Haider MA, Colomer J, Kayani S, Amin NU (2020) Moral education for
sustainable development: Comparison of university teachers’ perceptions in China and Pakistan.
Sustainability 12(7):3014
Bascopé M, Perasso P, Reiss K (2019) A systematic review of education for sustainable devel-
opment at an early stage: Cornerstones and pedagogical approaches for teacher professional
development. Sustainability 11(3):719
Bosio E, Schattle H (2021) Ethical global citizenship education: From neoliberalism to a values-
based pedagogy. Prospects 18(1):1–11
Bourn D, Kalsoom Q, Soysal N, Ince B (2023) Student teachers’ understanding and engagement
with education for sustainable development (ESD) in England, Türkiye (Turkey) and Pakistan
11(1):30–44
Bourn D, Hunt F, Bamber P (2017) A review of education for sustainable development and global
citizenship education in teacher education 19(2):10–17
Colomer J, Cañabate D, Stanikūnienė B, Bubnys R (2021) Formulating modes of cooperative
learning for education for sustainable development. Sustainability 13(6):3465
Corres A, Rieckmann M, Espasa A, Ruiz-Mallén I (2020) Educator competencies in Sustainability
Education: A systematic review of frameworks. Sustainability 12(23):9858
Durrani R, Malik S, Jumani NB (2019) Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) in pre-service
teachers education curriculum at Pakistan: current status and future directions. Pakistan J Dist
Online Learn 5(2):67–84
Eli M, Scheie E, Gabrielsen A, Jordet A, Misund S, Øyehaug AB (2020) Interdisciplinary primary
school curriculum units for sustainable development. Environ Educ Res 26(6):795–811
Fink A (2020) Conducting research literature reviews: from the internet to paper. Sage publications
Hadjichambis AC., Paraskeva-Hadjichambi D (2020) Education for environmental citizenship: The
pedagogical approach. Conceptualizing environmental citizenship for 21st-century education,
vol 4(1), pp 237–261
Hinduja P, Mohammad RF, Siddiqui S, Noor S, Hussain A (2023) Sustainability in higher educa-
tion institutions in Pakistan: a systematic review of progress and challenges. Sustainability
15(4):3406
Khadim M, Qureshi N, Khan AM (2021) Content analysis of national education policy 2017:
educational exertions towards education for sustainable development in Pakistan. J. Educ Rese
(1027–9776), 24(1).
Khadim M, Qureshi N, Khan AM (2022) Challenges of implementing education for sustainable
development: university teachers’ perspectives. PJE 39(1):31–39
Khanum A (2019) Environmentally conscious global citizens: an evolution from environmental
educationtoeducationforsustainabledevelopmentinPakistan(Doctoraldissertation,University
of Glasgow)
Khalid A, Malik GF, Mahmood K (2021) Sustainable development challenges in libraries: a
systematic literature review (2000–2020). J Acad Librariansh 47(3):102347
Leicht A, Heiss J, Byun WJ (2018) Issues and trends in education for sustainable development, vol
5. UNESCO publishing
Liston J, Devitt A (2020). Positioning development education and climate change education at the
heart of initial teacher education? Policy Pract: A Devel Educ Rev (30)
472
M. Khadim
Lorente-Echeverría S, Murillo-Pardo B, Canales-Lacruz I (2022) A systematic review of curriculum
sustainability at university: a key challenge for improving the professional development of
teachers of the future. Educ Sci 12(11):753
Malik MN, Khan HH, Chofreh AG, Goni FA, Klemeš JJ, Alotaibi Y (2019) Investigating students’
sustainability awareness and the curriculum of technology education in Pakistan. Sustainability
11(9):2651
Mirza MS (2020) Teacher educators’ preparedness for reorienting teacher education programs for
sustainable development in Pakistan. J Res Reﬂec Educ (JRRE) 14(1):43–57
Nousheen A, Zai SAY, Waseem M, Khan SA (2020) Education for sustainable development
(ESD): effects of sustainability education on pre-service teachers’ attitude towards sustainable
development (SD). J Clean Prod 250:119537
Olmos-Gómez MDC, Estrada-Vidal LI, Ruiz-Garzón F, López-Cordero R, Mohamed-Mohand L
(2019) Making future teachers more aware of issues related to sustainability: an assessment of
best practices. Sustainability 11(24):7222
Orlovic V, Maruna M, Stanarevic S (2020) Reﬂections on the learning objectives for sustainable
development in the higher education curricula–three cases from the University of Belgrade. Int
J Sustain High Educ 21(2):315–335
Rashid L (2019) Entrepreneurship education and sustainable development goals: a literature review
andacloserlookatfragilestatesandtechnology-enabledapproaches.Sustainability11(19):5343
Rieckmann M (2018) Learning to transform the world: key competencies in education for
sustainable development. Issues Trends Edu Sustain DevEL 39:39–59
Saqib ZA, Zhang Q, Ou J, Saqib KA, Majeed S, Razzaq A (2020) Education for sustainable
development in Pakistani higher education institutions: An exploratory study of students’ and
teachers’ perceptions. Int J Sustain High Educ 21(6):1249–1267
Saud M, Ashfaq A (2022) NGOs schools are promoting education for sustainable development in
rural areas. Globalization Soc Educ 20(5):682–694
Sund P, Gericke N (2020) Teaching contributions from secondary school subject areas to educa-
tion for sustainable development–a comparative study of science, social science and language
teachers. Environ Educ Res 26(6):772–794
Zhang T, Shaikh ZA, Yumashev AV, Chłąd M (2020) Applied model of E-learning in the framework
of education for sustainable development. Sustainability 12(16):6420
Zguir MF, Dubis S, Koç M (2021) Embedding Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) and
SDGs values in curriculum: a comparative review on Qatar, Singapore and New Zealand. J Clean
Prod 319:128534
Integrating the Agenda for Sustainable
Development into Entrepreneurship
Education: A Combination
of Expectation and Practice
Ratna Lindawati Lubis
Abstract This study delves into the integration of the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) into Telkom University’s Master in Management program in Bandung
City, Indonesia. This is a pivotal step in the ongoing process of curriculum change
set to unfold in the next academic year 2025–2026. Focused on Entrepreneurship
Education (EE), this study examines how sustainability research informs the incor-
poration of the 17 SDGs into entrepreneurship courses. Additionally, it evaluates
the impact of an innovative app designed to immerse students in green business and
sustainable entrepreneurship scenarios. Through qualitative case study analysis, the
study scrutinizes the app’s integration into EE courses, assessing its effectiveness in
enhancing students’ grasp of sustainable entrepreneurship, ethical decision-making,
and social responsibility. By aligning business education with the SDGs and utilizing
technology for sustainability research, the study aims to equip future Indonesian
entrepreneurs with the tools to positively inﬂuence economic and social dimensions.
This endeavor not only contributes to the ongoing curriculum change but also fosters
a conducive environment for sustainable entrepreneurship, aligning with broader
sustainable development objectives.
Keywords Entrepreneurship Education (EE) · Sustainable entrepreneurship ·
Curriculum change · Indonesian entrepreneurs · Business education
1
Introduction
Entrepreneurship stands as a pivotal force in shaping the trajectory of global
economies, offering not only innovation and job creation but also serving as a catalyst
for Sustainable Development (SD). With the growing recognition of its signiﬁcance,
R. L. Lubis (B)
Faculty of Economics and Business, Telkom University, Jl. Gegerkalong Hilir No. 47,
Bandung 40152, West Java, Indonesia
e-mail: ratnalnugroho@telkomuniversity.ac.id; ratnalubis2015@gmail.com
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_27
473
474
R. L. Lubis
the discourse surrounding entrepreneurship has evolved to encompass its poten-
tial to advance not just ﬁnancial prosperity but also social and environmental well-
being (Hockerts and Wüstenhagen 2010; Schaltegger and Wagner 2011). Central to
this evolution is the acknowledgment of the United Nations’ Sustainable Develop-
ment Goals (SDGs) as a blueprint for addressing the world’s most pressing chal-
lenges (United Nations 2015). The 17 SDGs outline a comprehensive framework for
achieving SD by 2030, spanning areas such as poverty alleviation, environmental
conservation, and gender equality (United Nations 2015).
Embedded within these goals lies immense potential for entrepreneurship to drive
meaningful change and contribute to the attainment of a more equitable and sustain-
able future (Zahra et al. 2009; Schaltegger and Wagner 2011). However, realizing the
potential demands a deliberate integration of the SDGs into entrepreneurial educa-
tion and practices (Zahra et al., 2009; Schaltegger and Wagner 2011). Recent studies
by Muñoz and Cohen (2018) and Sarango-Lalangui et al. (2018) have further under-
scored the role of entrepreneurship in achieving sustainability and the evolution of
sustainable entrepreneurship research and its potential for driving change. Moreover,
the works of Rosário et al. (2022) provides an in-depth analysis of the existing liter-
ature on sustainable entrepreneurship, its deﬁnition, concepts, and applications in
business. It highlights the importance of understanding sustainable entrepreneurship
in driving positive change and contributing to a more sustainable future.
Within the dynamic landscape of higher education, institutions are increasingly
recognizing the imperative to adapt their curricula to reﬂect emerging trends, societal
needs, and global challenges (Gibb 2011). The imperative to adapt higher education
curricula to reﬂect emerging trends, societal needs, and global challenges is a pressing
concern in the dynamic landscape of higher education. This adaption is crucial to
ensure that graduates are equipped with the skills, knowledge, and mindset neces-
sary to navigate the complexities of the modern world. Recent sources highlight
the importance of this adaption in various aspects of education, including the inte-
gration of technology, the development of soft skills, and the emphasis on lifelong
learning. For instance, a study published in 2023 emphasizes the need for colleges
to adapt their curriculum to prepare students for modern job market (Provost 2023).
This adaptation involves integrating technology-driven courses, embracing interdis-
ciplinary programs, and fostering soft skills like communication, teamwork, and
adaptability. Additionally, colleges are building partnerships with industry leaders to
provide students with insights into current industry trends and practical experiences
through internships and co-op programs. In light of the dynamic landscape of higher
education,TheLinkedInGlobalGreenSkillsReport2022(LinkedIn2022)servesasa
pertinent resource. This report provides valuable insights into the evolving demands
of the job market, particularly regarding sustainability and environmental consid-
erations. By understanding the skills and competencies in demand within indus-
tries prioritizing sustainability, Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) can adapt their
curricula to better align with these emerging trends. Integrating ﬁndings from this
report allows educators to equip students with the knowledge and skills necessary to
thrive in green job sectors, thereby bridging the gap between academic preparation
and industry needs, Consequently, by leveraging insights from The LinkedIn Global
Integrating the Agenda for Sustainable Development …
475
Green Skills Report 2022, HEIs can play a proactive role in preparing students for
the modern job market while simultaneously addressing environmental challenges.
Telkom University, situated in the vibrant city of Bandung, Indonesia, has been at
the forefront of the pedagogical evolution, particularly within its Master in Manage-
ment (MM) program. In response to the evolving demands of the global economy and
imperative to foster a new generation of socially conscious entrepreneurs, Telkom
University’s MM program has undertaken deliberate efforts to infuse sustainability
principles and the SDGs into its Entrepreneurship Education (EE) and practices
(Lubis 2019, 2022; Lubis and Ghina 2020).
Lubis (2019) delves into the integration of sustainability principles into the Educa-
tion for Sustainable Development (ESD), highlighting the importance of aligning
the environmental problems and societal problems with global sustainability goals
in the context of Eco Learning Camp Bandung City, Indonesia. This study provides
insights into the challenges and opportunities associated with the balance for the
governance mechanisms toward a better future, particularly in promoting ESD and
actively embracing the SDGs in Indonesia, laying the groundwork for subsequent
research on this topic.
In collaboration with Lubis and Ghina (2020) investigates the role of experi-
ential learning tools, such as case studies and simulations, in enhancing students’
understanding of sustainable entrepreneurship practices. This study investigated the
possibility of raising the extent of applying the ecological concept to the issues of
environmental and social challenges in Bandung City, Indonesia. It provides a unique
way of understanding the process of ESD and proposes a new framework which may
lead to the debate if and how the adoption of ESD prepares the educators for taking
their roles as the agents of SDG 4 Quality Education.
Finally, Lubis (2022) synthesizes the ﬁndings of previous studies and offers a
comprehensive framework for integrating sustainability principles into entrepreneur-
ship curricula. This study aims to inspire universities in Indonesia to take action and
support them through their research, learning, and teaching, and community services
or as known as “Tri Darma Perguruan Tinggi” and “Kampus Merdeka.” This study
consolidates key insights and recommendations, providing a schematic represen-
tation of the newly developed 6-credit course that may promote awareness about
17 SDGs, which employ interdisciplinary, action-based learning and multi-actor
involvement and go beyond usual operations.
Meanwhile, in parallel with Telkom University’s initiatives, management
programs in business schools around the world have embraced innovative approaches
to integrate sustainability principles and EE (Global Entrepreneurship Monitor 2024;
Harvard Business School 2024; INSEAD Executive Education 2024). These initia-
tives underscore the global momentum towards integrating sustainability into EE and
practices.
Reﬂecting on the author’s observations as a long-serving entrepreneurship
educator for 23 years in Telkom University’s MM program, it is important to note
that the foregoing discussion provided the recent ﬁndings from the previous articles
(Lubis 2019, 2022; Lubis and Ghina 2020). This study is part of the timeless research
476
R. L. Lubis
that may help the author strengthen the foundation of being the qualitative researcher
on the emerging ﬁeld of EE.
As the future generation of Indonesian entrepreneurs, students enrolled in Telkom
University’s MM program are poised to play a pivotal role in driving sustain-
able economic growth and fostering environmental stewardship. By integrating the
AWorld app (2024) into the curriculum, the MM program aims to cultivate a cohort
of entrepreneurial leaders who are not only adept at creating innovative businesses
but also committed to advancing the SDGs and promoting green business practices.
By leveraging technology and experiential learning platforms like the app, the MM
program equips students with the knowledge, skills, and mindset necessary to thrive
in an increasingly interconnected and sustainability-conscious business landscape.
As these students embark on their entrepreneurial journeys, they carry with them a
deep-seated understanding of the importance of integrating sustainability principles
into business strategies, thereby contributing to the realization of a more prosperous,
equitable, and environmentally sustainable future for Indonesia and beyond.
The rest of this chapter is organized as follows. First, the author reviews the
literature review in the ﬁeld of EE, the integration of SDGs into the realm of EE and
some key aspects that make the AWorld app necessary. Then, the author presents the
design and methodology of the study by aligning business education with SDGs and
utilizing technology for sustainability research. Next, the author presents the ﬁndings
in tables with evidence and explanation of how ﬁndings were reached. Based on those
ﬁndings, the author presents the discussion section which include the cross-check
against the literature and connection of results with other investigations. Based on this
discussion, the conclusion section proposes a comprehensive roadmap for integrating
17 SDGs into EE curriculum frameworks.
2
Literature Review
It is important to understand at this stage what the author understands by EE and
the many views of EE issues in HEIs. The most fundamental issue relating to EE
is addressing the question of whether entrepreneurship can be taught. Mwasalwiba
(2010) reviewed 108 articles devoted to EE and assessed the alignment existing
between its generic objectives, target audience, teaching methods and impact indica-
tors. A semi-systematic literature review is applied using six thematically separated
excel data collection spreadsheets. It has been found that scholars in this ﬁeld of
study, though differing in a number of deﬁnitive issues, are converging towards
a single framework of EE. There is a shift from a start-up view to an attitude-
changing perspective of EE. However, with a diversity of target groups, there is still
a non-alignment between what educators and other stakeholders wish to achieve in
educating for entrepreneurship with the applied pedagogical approaches, and success
indicators.
Theauthor’scomprehensionofEEwithinHEIsisdeeplyentrenchedintheconcept
of sustainability and its application across various disciplines. EE is perceived
Integrating the Agenda for Sustainable Development …
477
as a dynamic learning process aimed at enhancing individuals’ understanding of
entrepreneurship and its associated challenges, fostering the acquisition of requisite
skills and expertise to address these challenges, and nurturing attitudes, motivations,
and commitments conducive to informed decision-making and responsible action
(Nabi et al. 2017; Advance HE 2020). The author duly recognizes entrepreneurship’s
signiﬁcance within the framework of EE, underscoring the necessity for integrated
and experiential learning methodologies to cultivate the skills and knowledge indis-
pensable for sustainable entrepreneurship (Nabi et al. 2017; Advance HE 2020).
Moreover, the author acknowledges EE’s pivotal role in tackling sustainability chal-
lenges, with a focus on equipping learners with the skills and knowledge essential
for sustainable entrepreneurial endeavors (Nabi et al. 2017; Advance HE 2020). The
author’s perspectives on EE issues in HEIs are intricately informed by the broader
literature on EE, which underscores the importance of experiential learning, inter-
disciplinary education, and lifelong learning. Additionally, the author contends that
entrepreneurship is a teachable skill, advocating for its integration into the broader
context of EE, with emphasis on fostering the development of skills and knowledge
requisite for sustainable entrepreneurship.
Gibb (2011), in an article that discusses the concepts that underpin the practice
of the International Entrepreneurship Educators’ Programme (IEEP)—a UK-based
programme focused on staff in higher education (HE) and further education (FE)—
suggest that there is the growing articulation of the notion of the “entrepreneurial
mindset” as central to employability in general and to a wide range of personal and
organizational contexts. This leads to an associated need to widen the entrepreneur-
ship concept beyond the traditional business school-driven new business venture
and growth model to appeal to all students, no matter what their future careers and
personal experience. Furthermore, Gibb (2011) clearly explain that there is a need
to develop understanding of where EE sits within the web of education theory and
concept. Gibb (2011) states that it can be argued that EE can ﬁnd its place comfortably
within a number of well-established concepts broadly clustered under the umbrella
of social constructionist theories of knowledge and learning.
Having framed the many views of EE issues in HEIs, it is important to point out
here the main theories that impinge upon EE, which is set out in Table 1. There
are similarities and overlap between these different concepts. Nonetheless, these key
concepts help the author to recognize the very wide and varied interest in EE.
The article “Concepts into Practice: Meeting the Challenge of Development of
Entrepreneurship Educators Around an Innovative Paradigm: The Case of the Inter-
national Entrepreneurship Educators’ Programme (IEEP)” by Gibb (2011) is a signif-
icant contribution to the ﬁeld of EE. Although it was published in 2011, the ideas and
conceptspresentedinthearticleremainrelevantandinﬂuentialintheﬁeld.Thearticle
highlights the importance of developing entrepreneurship educators around an inno-
vativeparadigm,emphasizingtheneedforashiftfromtraditionalteachingmethodsto
more experiential and interactive approaches. In recent years, the need for innovative
and interactive EE has become increasingly recognized. The article’s emphasis on
the importance of experiential learning and the role of entrepreneurship educators in
fostering entrepreneurial mindsets aligns with contemporary discussions in the ﬁeld.
478
R. L. Lubis
Table 1 Mainstream education theories and entrepreneurship education
Theory/Concept
Key constructs
Relevance to
entrepreneurial education
Self-efﬁcacy theory
(Bandura)
Emphasis on self-action, role
model observation/ coding
leading to attitude
development
Underlines importance of
entrepreneurial role models
and observation of practice
innovation
Experiential learning
(Papert and Harel)
Learners to be actively
involved in learning processes
to construct knowledge and
meaning from experience
Supports importance of
learning by doing and making
things happen
Psychodrama
(Moreno)
Underpins importance of role
play in different contexts
emphasizing creativity,
leading to enhanced empathy
and understanding
Provides the means for
creating empathy via
“feeling”, a key relationship
management component in
entrepreneurial activity
Social learning and the zone of
proximal development
(Vygotsky)
Capacity to learn dependent
on existing levels of
knowledge and understanding
in turn a function of social
interaction
Emphasizes the importance of
learning on a socially
interactive “need to know”
and “capacity to know” basis
Situated learning and the
“community of practice”
(Lave and Wenger)
Learning is a “situated” event
which can be enhanced
“unintentionally” through the
“community of practice”
Underpins the concept of
learning from experience and
the acquisition of tacit
knowledge
The concept of
tacit knowledge
(Polanyi)
Learning through contextual
experience, formally uncoded,
enhanced by personal trust
and based on intention to act
Emphasizes the importance of
relationship learning in a wide
range of contexts – a key
component in
entrepreneurship development
The concept of “emotional
intelligence”
(Goleman)
Focuses on the importance of
understanding feelings and
the relationship context in the
learning process
Facilitates exploration of the
impact of an entrepreneurial
life world on the ways that
entrepreneurs accumulate and
use knowledge
Heuristics and intuitive
decision making
(Manimala et al.)
Involves mind-maps based on
accumulation of experience as
a basis for informal decision -
making processes
Provides the basis for
exploration of the way that
entrepreneurs build
decision-making processes by
accumulation of knowledge
through problem
(continued)
Integrating the Agenda for Sustainable Development …
479
Table 1 (continued)
Theory/Concept
Key constructs
Relevance to
entrepreneurial education
The concept of
metacognition
(Bransford et al.)
Emphasizes the importance of
self-awareness, self-reﬂection
and self-regulation in the
learning process
Emphasizes the importance of
capacity for ﬂexible strategic
thinking
Andragogy
(Knowles)
Focuses on the independence
of the learner, immediacy in
application in knowledge and
social roles in learning
In general, underpins the
notion of entrepreneurial
learning by doing
Source Gibb (2011, p.155)
For instance, the 3E Conference 2024 (https://3e2024.org/) emphasizes the impor-
tance of playfulness and experimentation in EE, which aligns with Gibb’s call for a
more innovative approach to EE. Furthermore, the article’s focus on the development
of entrepreneurship educators as a key factor in successful EE is supported by more
recent research. For example, a study on mediating effects based on entrepreneurial
competence highlights the importance of EE in cultivating entrepreneurial ability
and entrepreneurial intention (Lv et al. 2021).
The integration of SDGs into academic curricula, particularly within the realm
of EE, has gained increasing attention in recent years. This heightened focus stems
from the recognition of entrepreneurship as a potent vehicle for driving sustain-
able economic growth and addressing pressing societal and environmental issues
(Audretsch and Belitski 2020; Gielnik et al. 2021). As global challenges such as
climate crisis, poverty, and inequality become more pressing, the imperative to imbue
EE with sustainability principles become paramount. Traditionally, EE has centered
on imparting students with the skills and knowledge necessary to initiate and manage
businesses. However, there is a discernible shift towards integrating sustainability
principles into entrepreneurship curricula. This shift aims to equip students not only
with the capacity to establish proﬁtable enterprises but also foster ventures that
contribute to social and environmental well-being (Schaltegger et al. 2018, Fayolle
et al. 2019).
The agenda for SDGs, adopted by all United Nations Member States in 2015,
providesacomprehensiveframeworkforaddressingglobalchallengesandpromoting
sustainable development. By embedding the 17 SDGs into entrepreneurship courses,
educational institutions can align business education with broader societal goals and
cultivateacultureofresponsibleentrepreneurship(LaukkanenandNagy2016;Hock-
erts 2017). Numerous studies have delved into the potential beneﬁts, challenges, and
strategies associated with incorporating SDGs into EE. For instance, Kuckertz et al.
(2020) underscore the positive impact of sustainability-focused EE on students’ atti-
tudes and intentions towards sustainable business practices. However, challenges
such as faculty resistance, resource constraints, and inadequate institutional support
have also surfaced (Fayolle et al. 2019; Patzelt et al. 2020). Additionally, the Global
480
R. L. Lubis
Schools Program, an initiative of the United Nations Sustainable Development Solu-
tions Network (UN SDSN), provides case studies and guides for educators to incor-
porate ESD into their teaching (Global Schools Program 2024). These resources can
be used to understand the effectiveness and impact of similar educational programs
on promoting SD in schools.
In the context of academic institutions like Telkom University, which increasingly
prioritize sustainability in their educational offerings, empirical research is essential
to examine how SDGs are integrated into entrepreneurship curricula and evaluate
the efﬁcacy of such endeavors. Qualitative case study approaches, as employed in
this study, offer invaluable insights into the design, implementation, and outcomes
of curriculum changes (Yin 2018). In this context, innovative tools and technologies
play a crucial role in facilitating experiential learning and promoting the integration
of sustainability principles into entrepreneurship curricula. One such innovative tool
is the AWorld app, a virtual platform designed to immerse students in real-world
scenarios related to green businesses and sustainable entrepreneurship. Developed
with the aim of bridging the gap between theoretical knowledge and practical applica-
tion, the app offers students the opportunity to explore and navigate the complexities
of sustainable business practices in a simulated environment.
The crucial thing about the AWorld app is its potential to create positive change by
empowering individuals to make sustainable choices and take actions that contribute
to a more environmentally friendly and socially responsible world. Some key aspects
conﬁrm the importance of the app. For example, the app helps individuals understand
the importance of sustainable living and equips them with the knowledge to make
informed decisions; the app goes beyond just providing information by encouraging
users to change their behaviors and consumption patterns actively; the app assists
users in making sustainable purchasing decisions by offering a database of eco-
friendly products and services; the app fosters a sense of community by connecting
like-minded individuals passionate about sustainability; and the app has the potential
to generate a signiﬁcant cumulative impact.
Appendix A showcases an image of the AWorld app, a pivotal component of
the author’s research data. The image not only depicts the interface of the app but
also includes the proﬁle of the author within the app, indicating the author’s active
engagement since signing up in 2020 during the Covid-19 pandemic. Subsequently,
the author incorporated the app as part of the case discussions in Telkom University’s
MM program starting from academic year 2021–2022. The app, which launched
its mobile version in support of the UN ActNow campaign on September 2020
(Onorato 2020), serves as an innovative tool designed to immerse users in real-world
scenarios related to green business and sustainable entrepreneurship. The image in
Appendix Ainform readers about the technology platform utilized within the study,
and underscores the importance of transparency by offering tangible reference to the
tool discussed throughout the research process.
There are no speciﬁc case studies or success stories schools using the AWorld
educational program for sustainable schools. However, there are examples of the
AWorld app being used in undergraduate training courses to promote sustainable
living (Gutiérrez et al. 2021; Tinoco-Giraldo et al. 2023). These authors discuss the
Integrating the Agenda for Sustainable Development …
481
importance of promoting sustainable living through education and awareness-raising
efforts,particularlyamonguniversitystudents.TheAWorldappispresented,amobile
tool designed to disseminate clear and accurate information from reliable sources
with the aim of changing users’ habits and mindset to contribute to environmental
sustainability. These articles present the results of a pedagogical and user interface
usability evaluation of the AWorld app, conducted by twenty-ﬁve experts. The eval-
uation utilized a questionnaire to assess the quality of mobile learning apps. The
ﬁndings suggest that the app has the potential to serve as the educational resources
for promoting sustainable living among university students, encouraging them to
adopt sustainability and healthy lifestyles and address issues such as climate crisis
within higher education environments.
InadditiontothearticlesbyGutiérrezetal.(2021)andTinoco-Giraldoetal.(2023)
which discuss the use of the AWorld app in undergraduate training courses, further
research supports the efﬁcacy of apps and gamiﬁcation in promoting sustainable
behaviors and environmental awareness among diverse populations. For example,
Ligorio et al. (2022) explore the potential of gamiﬁcation in fostering SDGs, demon-
strating how gamiﬁed approaches can engage individuals in sustainable practices and
promote positive environmental behaviors. This study provides valuable insights into
the effectiveness of gamiﬁcation strategies in promoting sustainability. Moreover,
D’Arco and Marino (2022) investigate the relationship between environmental citi-
zenship behavior and sustainability apps, offering empirical evidence on the impact
of such apps on individuals’ attitudes and behaviors towards environmental sustain-
ability. Their ﬁndings contribute to the understanding of how technology-based inter-
ventions, such as sustainability apps, can inﬂuence pro-environmental actions and
contribute to sustainable living practices. These additional sources complement the
existing literature by highlighting the broader context of technology-based interven-
tions in promoting sustainability, providing further support for the potential of the
AWorld app as an educational tool for promoting sustainable living among university
students.
This literature review discusses the increasing attention given to integrating SDGs
into academic curricula, particularly within EE. In notes the shift towards incor-
porating sustainability principles into entrepreneurship courses to equip students
with skills not only for proﬁtability but also for social and environmental impact.
The adoption of SDGs provides a framework for aligning business education with
broader societal goals. While studies highlight the positive impact of sustainability-
focused EE on student attitudes, challenges such as faculty resistance and resource
constraints remain. Initiatives like the Global Schools Program offer resources for
educators to integrate ESD. The review emphasizes the importance of empirical
research, particularly qualitative case studies, to examine the integration of SDGs
into entrepreneurship curricula and evaluate their effectiveness. It also introduces
innovative tools like the AWorld app, designed to immerse students in sustainable
business scenarios, though speciﬁc case studies of its implementation in schools are
lacking. Overall, the review underscores the potential of integrating sustainability
principles into EE to address pressing global challenges and promote responsible
entrepreneurship.
482
R. L. Lubis
3
Materials and Methods
This study adopts a qualitative case study approach to deeply explore the integra-
tion of SDGs within Telkom University’s MM program. This approach is meticu-
lously chosen to provide a profound understanding of how SD principles permeate
the entrepreneurship course, acknowledging its nuanced and context-speciﬁc nature
(Yin 2018). By embracing qualitative research, this study seeks to unearth rich and
multifaceted insights into the experiences, perceptions, and motivations of students
involved in the integration process (Creswell and Poth 2018).
Through semi-structured interviews, observation, and a Likert scale question-
naire conducted with the students who enrolled the entrepreneurship course during
academic year 2023–2024, the study aims to capture the essence of SDG integra-
tion within the MM program (Creswell and Creswell 2017). These methods are
meticulously selected to unravel the complexities and intricacies of the integration
process, allowing for a holistic examination of motivations, strategies, challenges,
andperceivedeffectivenessofcurriculumchanges(MerriamandTisdell2016).Atthe
culmination of the semester, following the completion of the entrepreneurship course,
the author collected the Likert scale questionnaire from all the participating students.
These questionnaires served as invaluable instruments to quantitatively assess the
students’ perceptions and experiences with the AWorld app. Furthermore, the author
conducted semi-structured interviews with a subset of students to gain deeper insights
into their perspectives, experiences, and perceptions regarding the integration of the
app into the course curriculum. Speciﬁcally, interviews were conducted with 10 select
students to gather diverse perspectives and understand the varied impacts and impli-
cations of the app’s integration. While there is not a strict rule or deﬁnitive reference
specifying the exact number of interviews needed in qualitative research, the concept
of saturation is widely discussed and accepted in qualitative research methodology.
Saturation refers to the point at which new data ceases to provide additional insights
or themes, indicating that enough data has been collected to adequately address the
research questions (Guest et al. 2006; Saunders et al. 2018). Ultimately, the speciﬁc
number of students to interview should be determined based on the research goals,
the complexity of the topic, and the depth of analysis required.
Given that the total students who enrolled the entrepreneurship course during
academic year 2023–2024 are 46, and considering practical constraints such as time
and resources, conducting interviews with approximately 10–20% of the student
population could be a reasonable approach. Therefore, interviewing 10 students may
provide a sufﬁcient range of perspective and insights while ensuring that saturation
is likely to be achieved. These interviews provided a qualitative dimension to the
data collection process, allowing for a comprehensive understanding of the students’
engagement with the AWorld app and its impact on their learning experiences. The
semi-structurednatureoftheinterviewsofferedﬂexibilityforstudentstoexpresstheir
thoughts freely while ensuring that key research objectives were addressed. Through
the data collection process, the author garnered rich and diverse perspective that
contribute signiﬁcantly to the study’s ﬁndings and conclusions.
Integrating the Agenda for Sustainable Development …
483
Based on Merriam and Tisdell (2016), Yin (2018), Creswell and Creswell (2017),
Creswell and Poth (2018), Table 2 provides a concise overview of the data collection
methods employed in this study.
As stated earlier, the Telkom University’s MM program equips students with
the knowledge, skills, and mindset necessary to thrive in an increasingly intercon-
nected and sustainability-conscious business landscape. Looking to the future also
reﬂect the broad variety of methods of EE in Telkom University, and there is no one
correct deﬁnition and comprehensive deﬁnition of its content. Indeed, it is a dynamic
phenomenon as shown in Table 1 (Gibb 2011). In this regard, the author acknowl-
edged that conducting the case study by emphasizing the signiﬁcance of aligning
business education with the AWorld app (2024) for sustainability research was seen
as a signiﬁcant effort to promote sustainability research.
During academic year 2023–2024, spanning from September 2023 to January
2024, the author undertook the delivery of entrepreneurship course for Telkom
University’s MM students. Speciﬁcally, the course focused on “Corporate
Entrepreneurship” and attracted a total of 46 enthusiastic participants. As an integral
part of the course curriculum, all students were actively engaged with the AWorld app,
having signed up for it since the beginning of the semester. Prior to administering
Likert scale questionnaires, comprehensive information sessions were conducted
to familiarize students with the app’s features and functionalities. These sessions
aimed to ensure that students grasped the essential aspects of the app, enabling them
to provide accurate responses to the questionnaire prompts. The Likert scale ques-
tionnaires, designed to gauge student’s perceptions and experiences with the AWorld
app, are provided in Appendix B.
Table 2 Summary of data collection and data analysis
Method
Description
Data collection
Documentation analysis
Review and analysis of program documents, including curriculum
materials and institutional policies
Surveys
Administration of Likert scale questionnaires to 46 students
enrolled in entrepreneurship course during academic year
2023–2024
Semi-structured interviews
Conducted with the selected students using interview guides
Data analysis
Documentation analysis
Thematic analysis of program documents to identify recurring
themes, patterns, and contradictions related to 17 SDGs integration
Surveys
Quantitative analysis of survey responses using statistical software
to compute descriptive statistics
Semi-structured interviews
Thematic analysis of interview transcripts to identify overarching
themes, patterns, and variations in students’ perspectives
484
R. L. Lubis
The items for the semi structure interview, are presented in the Appendix C. These
interview questions were carefully crafted to explore various aspects of the integra-
tion process, including the challenges encountered, perceived beneﬁts, strategies
employed, and the impact of innovative tools such as the AWorld app. By utilizing a
semi-structured format, the interview aimed to provide ﬂexibility for the students to
express their thoughts and experiences while ensuring consistency in addressing key
research objectives. Appendix C serves as a reference point for the author and readers
interested in understanding the speciﬁc questions posed to the students during the
data collection phase, thereby enhancing the transparency and replicability of the
study’s methodology.
Focusing on the MM program at Telkom University as a singular case study
enables an in-depth exploration within the Indonesian higher education landscape
(Stake 2013). This deliberate choice empowers the author to examine the integra-
tion process within a speciﬁc academic context, fostering a deeper understanding of
the dynamics at play (Yin 2018). Engaging with 46 students during academic year
2023–2024 further enriches the study by capturing diverse perspectives and experi-
ences (Patton 2015). Throughout the research journey, reﬂexivity remains paramount
(Finlay and Gough 2008). The author continuously examines their biases, assump-
tions, and preconceptions to ensure the integrity and trustworthiness of the ﬁnd-
ings (Charmaz 2014). This reﬂexivity cultivates methodological rigor, safeguarding
against potential biases and enhancing the credibility of the study’s outcomes (Tracy
2013).
Insummary,thuscasestudyapproachischosentofacilitateaprofoundexploration
of sustainability research integration within the Telkom University’s MM program.
By embracing multi-dimensional perspective and engaging deeply with students, this
study aspires to generate invaluable insights that contribute to the ongoing discourse
on aligning business education with sustainability research (Creswell and Poth 2018),
ultimately paving the way for SD within higher education institutions.
4
Findings
The ﬁndings of this study offer valuable insights into the integration of SDGs into
Telkom University’s MM program, with a speciﬁc focus on EE. Through a combina-
tion of quantitative analysis of Likert scale questionnaires and qualitative exploration
via semi-structured interviews, this section presents a comprehensive examination
of students’ perceptions, experiences, and attitudes towards the AWorld app and its
integration into the entrepreneurship curriculum. From evaluating the effectiveness
of the app in enhancing students’ understanding of sustainability entrepreneurship
to uncovering challenges and opportunities associated with its implementation, the
ﬁndings shed light on the complexities and nuances of aligning business education
with the broader agenda for SD. By synthesizing quantitative and qualitative data,
this section offers a holistic perspective on the impact of the curriculum change
Integrating the Agenda for Sustainable Development …
485
initiative and the role of innovative technologies in fostering sustainability-oriented
EE.
The ﬁndings of data collection are presented in Table 3, which provides a detailed
overview of the quantitative responses obtained through Likert scale questionnaires
administered to 46 students enrolled in the “Corporate Entrepreneurship” course
during the academic year 2023–2024. The table encompasses a range of key metrics,
including students’ perceptions of the AWorld app’s usability, its effectiveness in
enhancing their understanding of sustainability entrepreneurship, and their overall
satisfaction with its integration into the curriculum.
This Table 3 summarizes the responses for each category of questions related to
awareness about sustainability, behavior change, sustainable product recommenda-
tion, collaboration on sustainability initiatives, and long-term impact. Each response
option is presented as a percentage of total respondents.
Additionally, qualitative insights gleaned from semi-structured interviews with a
select group of students provide direct insights into the experiences, perspectives, and
sentiments expressed by students regarding the integration of the AWorld app into
the EE. The summary ﬁndings of data collection are presented in Table 4. Through
thematic analysis, the qualitative ﬁndings are organized into emergent themes that
capture the multifaceted nature of students’ experiences with the AWorld app and
its implications for EE. Together, the quantitative and qualitative ﬁndings offer a
comprehensive depiction of the impact of the curriculum change initiative and the
AWorld app’s role in shaping students’ learning experiences in relation to sustainable
entrepreneurship.
After presenting the ﬁndings, the author now moves into the discussion section,
which include the cross-check against the literature and connection of results with
other investigations.
5
Discussion
The ﬁndings of this study offer valuable insights that contribute to ongoing academic
debated and align with relevant peer-reviewed publications in the ﬁeld. The student’s
perceptions and experiences with the AWorld app as well as its implications for EE
resonated with discussions in academic literature concerning the role of education
in fostering sustainability-driven in entrepreneurship (Fayolle et al. 2019; Gielnik
et al. 2021). Similarly, the study’s emphasis on practical, hands-on learning experi-
ences and effectiveness of tools like the AWorld app align with recommendations in
scholarly literature advocating for experiential learning approaches to enhance under-
standingandengagementwithsustainabilityconcepts(Hockerts2017;Kuckertzetal.
2020). However, challenges such as resource allocation, faculty training, and tech-
nological integration, are consistent with ﬁndings from previous studies examining
barriers to sustainability integration in higher education contexts (Laukkanen and
Nagy 2016; Audretsch and Belitski 2020). Despite these challenges, the perceived
effectiveness of the curriculum changes in fostering students’ understanding of
486
R. L. Lubis
Table 3 The quantitative responses obtained through Likert scale questionnaires
Category
Strongly disagree
(in %)
Disagree
(in %)
Neutral
(in %)
Agree
(in %)
Strongly agree
(in %)
Awareness about sustainability
Using the AWorld app
increased awareness
5
10
15
45
25
The AWorld app helped
understand importance
of sustainable practices
3
7
20
40
30
The AWorld
effectiveness in
providing sustainability
information
2
5
15
45
33
Behavior change
Likelihood to
incorporate sustainable
practices
3
8
12
40
37
Inﬂuence on
decision-making
towards sustainability
1
5
18
47
29
Motivation to adopt
environmentally
friendly behaviors
2
6
22
43
27
Sustainable product recommendations
Helpful sustainable
product
recommendations
1
4
17
50
28
Trust in
recommendation for
sustainable products
2
6
20
45
27
Likelihood to purchase
recommended
sustainable products
3
9
15
40
33
Collaboration on sustainability initiatives
Willingness to
collaborate on
sustainability initiatives
1
3
18
47
31
The AWorld app
facilitates collaboration
for sustainability
projects
2
5
19
44
30
Likelihood to engage in
group activities related
to sustainability through
the AWorld app
4
10
16
38
32
(continued)
Integrating the Agenda for Sustainable Development …
487
Table 3 (continued)
Category
Strongly disagree
(in %)
Disagree
(in %)
Neutral
(in %)
Agree
(in %)
Strongly agree
(in %)
Long-term impact
Conﬁdence in long-term
positive changes in
awareness
2
4
20
45
29
Inﬂuence of the AWorld
app on behavior towards
sustainability
1
6
18
48
27
Likelihood to continue
using the AWorld app in
the future
3
7
14
41
35
Note n = 46; ratings are on a 5-point scale, from strongly disagree (1) to strongly agree (5)
sustainable entrepreneurship practices and ethical-decision making aligns with ﬁnd-
ings from other investigations (Global Entrepreneurship Monitor 2024; Harvard
Business School 2024; INSEAD Executive Education 2024). The recommendations
forimprovement,emphasizingtheintegrationofinnovativetoolsliketheAWorldapp,
are consistent with suggestions put forth in the literature (Hockerts 2017; INSEAD
Executive Education 2024). Overall, this study contributes valuable insights into
the integration of the agenda of SD into EE within the MM Program at Telkom
Univeristy, offering practical recommendation and reinforcing the importance of
preparing future entrepreneurs to positively impact economic and social dimensions
through sustainability research.
As thefocus of this studyis ontheimpact of aninnovativeappdesignedtoimmerse
students in green business and sustainable entrepreneurship scenarios which illus-
trates the combination of expectation and practice, the following table summarizes
the key aspects of the AWorld app with the cross-check against the literature (Table 5).
This cross-check against the literature demonstrates how the key aspects of
the AWorld app align with and contribute to existing research ﬁndings on similar
approaches to promoting sustainability through technology-driven platforms and
EE.
In exploring the students’ perceptions of the upcoming curriculum change initia-
tive and the integration of the AWorld app into entrepreneurship courses at Telkom
University’s MM program, this study delves into a rich tapestry of insights and
reﬂections that are deeply embedded in the evolving landscape of business educa-
tion. As the author embark on this journey of analysis, it is imperative to ground this
exploration in established theoretical frameworks and methodological approaches
that underpin qualitative research in the social sciences. Scholars such as Charmaz
(2014), Merriam and Tisdell (2016), and Creswell and Creswell (2017), have laid
the groundwork for understanding the intricacies of qualitative inquiry, providing
the author with valuable tools to navigate the complexities of this exploration.
488
R. L. Lubis
Table 4 The summary ﬁndings derived from the semi-structured interviews
Question
Answer
Quote 1
Quote 2
Quote 3
Perception of the
upcoming
curriculum
change initiative
and its impact on
EE at Telkom
University’s MM
program
Students
perceive the
upcoming
curriculum
change initiative
as a signiﬁcant
opportunity to
enhance EE at
Telkom
University’s MM
program
The upcoming
curriculum
change initiative
presents a
signiﬁcant
opportunity to
enhance EE at
Telkom
University’s MM
program
I believe
curriculum
change initiative
will have a
positive impact
on EE, providing
us with updated
and relevant
knowledge and
skills
The initiative
signiﬁes a
commitment to
staying relevant
and equipping
students with the
tools needed for
success in a
rapidly changing
business
landscape
Thoughts on the
integration of the
AWorld app into
entrepreneurship
courses and its
enhancement of
the learning
experience
Students view
the integration of
the AWorld app
as a valuable
addition to
entrepreneurship
courses,
enhancing the
learning
experience by
providing
practical insights
into real-world
scenarios
The AWorld app
enhances the
learning
experience by
providing
practical insights
into real-world
scenarios related
to green business
and sustainable
entrepreneurship
I ﬁnd the AWorld
app valuable
because it
immerses us in
practical
situations,
allowing us to
apply theoretical
knowledge to
real-world
challenges
Using the AWorld
app makes
learning more
dynamic and
engaging, as it
provides
hands-on
experience in
navigating
complexities of
green business
practices
Speciﬁc aspects
of the AWorld
app considered
most valuable in
immersing
students in
real-world
scenarios
Students
highlight the
practically of the
AWorld app, its
ability to
immerse them in
real-world
scenarios, and its
focus on green
business and
sustainable
entrepreneurship
as the most
valuable aspects
The practically of
the AWorld app
allows us to
directly apply
theoretical
concepts to
real-world
challenges
The AWorld app
immerses us in
real-world
scenarios,
providing
valuable insights
into the
complexities of
green business
and sustainable
entrepreneurship
I ﬁnd the focus of
the AWorld app
on green
business and
sustainable
entrepreneurship
particularly
valuable, as it
aligns with
current global
priorities and
trends
(continued)
Integrating the Agenda for Sustainable Development …
489
Table 4 (continued)
Question
Answer
Quote 1
Quote 2
Quote 3
Anticipation of
potential
challenges during
the
implementation
of the curriculum
change initiative
and integration of
the AWorld app
Students
anticipate
challenges
related to
resource
allocation,
faculty training,
and
technological
integration,
emphasizing the
importance of
proactive
measures to
address these
challenges
effectively
Anticipated
challenges
include resource
allocation,
faculty training,
and technological
integration, which
require proactive
measures for
effective
resolution
We foresee
challenges in
ensuring smooth
integration of the
AWorld app into
coursework,
particularly
regarding
technological
compatibility and
training for
faculty members
Addressing
potential
challenges
requires
proactive
planning and
collaboration
among
stakeholders to
ensure successful
implementation
of both the
curriculum
change initiative
and the AWorld
app integration
Vision for the
integration of the
AWorld app and
similar initiatives
shaping the future
of EE at
Students
envision a future
where the
integration of
innovative tools
like the AWorld
app transforms
EE, equipping
students with
practical skills
for addressing
real-world
challenges
The integration of
the AWorld app
and similar
initiatives will
transform
entrepreneurship
education,
equipping us with
practical skills
for addressing
real-world
challenges
Incorporating
innovative tools
like the AWorld
app into
coursework
signiﬁes a
commitment to
preparing
students for
success in a
rapidly evolving
business
landscape
I believe the
integration of the
AWorld app
marks the
beginning of
transformative
journey in
entrepreneurship
education,
positioning
Telkom
University’s MM
program as a
leader in
fostering
innovative and
sustainable
business
practices
Note The quotes in this table are derived from the semi-structured interviews conducted with a
selected group of students enrolled in the “Corporate Entrepreneurship” during academic year
2023–2024, spanning from September 2023 to January 2024
The author acknowledged that the students’ nuanced awareness of the potential
implications of these initiatives on their learning experiences and future endeavors
in the ﬁeld of EE. Their perceptions offer a window into multifaceted nature of
educational reforms and the transformative impact they can have on individuals and
institutions alike. Drawing from the theoretical underpinnings of qualitative research
methodologies (Tracy 2013; Patton 2015), the author uncovers layers of meaning
490
R. L. Lubis
Table 5 Key aspects of the AWorld app with the cross-check against the literature
Key Aspects of the
AWorld app
Description
Linked previous
study
Cross-check
against literature
Awareness about
sustainability
The AWorld app raises
awareness about
sustainability issues and
educates users on the
environmental impact of
their choices through
information, articles, and
resources
Laukkanen and
Nagy (2016);
Gutiérrez et al.
(2021)
Similar studies have
highlighted the importance of
technology-driven platforms
in educating individuals about
sustainability issues
(Audretsch and Belitski 2020;
Global Entrepreneurship
Monitor 2024)
Behavior change
The app encourages users
to actively change their
behaviors and
consumption patterns by
providing personal
sustainability scores,
challenges, and motivation
for sustainable living
Kuckertz et al.
(2020); Global
Entrepreneurship
Monitor (2024)
Previous research has shown
that technology-based
interventions can effectively
inﬂuence behavior change
towards sustainable practices
(Gielnik et al. 2021; Harvard
Business School 2024)
Sustainable
product
recommendation
AWorld assists users in
making sustainable
purchasing decisions by
offering a database of
eco-friendly products and
services, highlighting
alternatives, and ethical
sourcing
Lubis (2019);
Global Schools
Program (2024)
Studies have indicated the
signiﬁcance of providing
consumers with information
and recommendations for
sustainable products to
promote environmentally
conscious consumption
(Fayolle et al. 2019; Global
Schools Program 2024)
Collaboration on
sustainability
initiatives
The app fosters a
community of like-minded
individuals passionate
about sustainability,
enabling users to share
achievements, exchange
tips, and collaborate of
initiatives
Lubis and Ghina
(2020); INSEAD
Executive
Education (2024)
Collaborative platforms for
sustainability initiatives have
been identiﬁed as effective in
engaging individuals and
fostering collective action
towards sustainability goals
(Hockerts 2017; Harvard
Business School 2024)
Long-term impact
AWorld has the potential
to generate signiﬁcant
cumulative impact by
promoting sustainable
practices, reducing
resource consumption,
carbon emissions, and
improving environmental
conditions
Hockerts (2017);
Fayolle et al.
(2019)
Prior studies have emphasized
the importance of long-term
sustainability efforts in
achieving meaningful
environmental outcomes and
societal impact (Kuckertz
et al. 2020; Global
Entrepreneurship Monitor
2024)
Note Author’s construct
Integrating the Agenda for Sustainable Development …
491
embedded within students’ responses, illuminating the complex interplay between
theory and practice in EE.
One of the key themes that emerges from the analysis is the students’ anticipation
of potential challenges during the implementation of the curriculum change initiative
and integration of the AWorld app. As Stake (2013) and Yin (2018) argue, educa-
tional reforms often encounter various hurdles, ranging from resource constraints to
resistance to change. The students’ recognition of these challenges underscores their
pragmatic outlook and their understanding of the realities of enacting educational
reforms in a complex and dynamic environment. Moreover, their emphasis on the
importance of practical skills for addressing real-world challenges reﬂects a commit-
ment to collaborative problem-solving and continuous improvement in EE. Another
salient aspect is the students’ deep appreciation for the practicality and real-world
applicability of the AWorld app. As Finlay and Gough (2008) and Tracy (2013) assert,
experiential learning plays a crucial role in fostering critical thinking and problem-
solving skills among students. The students’ recognition of the AWorld app as a
valuable tool for immersing them in real-world scenarios related to green business
and sustainable entrepreneurship speaks to the transformative potential of innova-
tive technologies in education. By bridging the gap between theory and practice,
the AWorld app empowers students to apply theoretical concepts to real-world chal-
lenges, thereby enhancing their learning experience and preparing them for success
in the competitive landscape of entrepreneurship.
Through this study, the author proposed a comprehensive roadmap for integrating
17 SDGs into EE curriculum frameworks. The roadmap encompasses various stages,
from laying the foundation and designing research methodologies to data collection
and analysis, knowledge generation and synthesis, impact assessment and evalua-
tion, and scaling and sustainability efforts. Each stage involves speciﬁc activities
aimed at promoting interdisciplinary collaboration, generating actionable insights,
and fostering meaningful partnerships with stakeholders, as shown in Table 6.
6
Conclusions and Outlook
As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, this study represents a signiﬁ-
cant contribution to the author’s ongoing journey as a qualitative researcher in the
emerging ﬁeld of Entrepreneurship Education. The concept of integrating business
education with the 17 SDGs and leveraging the AWorld app to drive a paradigm shift
in sustainability research is crucial for facilitating ongoing curriculum changes. This
study serves as a cornerstone in strengthening the foundation of qualitative research
within the realm of EE.
In conclusion, this study marks a signiﬁcant milestone in advancing the author’s
understanding of the intersection between EE and SD goals. By proposing a compre-
hensive roadmap for integrating 17 SDGs into EE curriculum frameworks, the author
has laid the groundwork for fostering a more sustainable and socially responsible
approach to business education. Moving forward, it is imperative that everyone in
492
R. L. Lubis
Table 6 The roadmap with a timeline linked to the academic year 2025–2026
Stage
Activities
Timeline
1. Foundation
(a) Conduct literature review
on the 17 SDGs and EE
June–August 2024
(b) Establish collaboration
with relevant stakeholders
September–October 2024
(c) Deﬁne objectives and
scope of the integration
November 2024
2. Research methodologies
(d) Design research
methodologies to align
with the 17 SDGs
December 2024–January 2025
(e) Identify key indicators for
measuring progress
February–March 2025
3. Data collection and analysis (f) Collect data on current
curriculum frameworks
and practices
April–May 2025
(g) Analyze data to identify
strengths, weaknesses, and
gaps
June–July 2025
4. Knowledge Generation
(h) Generate knowledge
through qualitative and
quantitative research
August–September 2025
(i) Synthesize ﬁndings to
develop insights and
recommendations
October–November 2025
5. Impact assessment and
evaluation
(j) Assess the impact of
proposed curriculum
changes on students and
stakeholders
December 2025
(k) Evaluate effectiveness of
integration efforts and
identify areas for
improvement
January–February 2026
6. Scaling and sustainability
(l) Develop strategies for
scaling up successful
initiatives
March–April 2026
(m) Establish mechanisms for
long-term sustainability
of integration efforts
May–June 2026
7. Dissemination and
collaboration
(n) Share ﬁndings and best
practices with wider
academic and practitioner
communities
July–August 2026
(continued)
Integrating the Agenda for Sustainable Development …
493
Table 6 (continued)
Stage
Activities
Timeline
(o) Foster collaboration with
other institutions and
organizations working
towards similar goals
September 2026
8. Integration of AWorld app
(p) Integrate AWorld app into
EE curriculum frameworks
(q) Pilot AWorld app in
selected courses to assess
effectiveness
(r) Collect feedback from
students and faculties on
the usability and impact of
the app
(s) Analyze feedback to reﬁne
and improve the courses
October–December 2026
Note Author’s construct
academia and HEIs, involved in EE and sustainability research, continues to build
upon this foundation. Collaboration across disciplines and the utilization of inno-
vative tools like the AWorld app are essential to drive positive change and advance
sustainable practices in education and beyond.
Possible future research directions include exploring the long-term impact of
sustainability integration on student outcomes, conducting comparative studies
across different educational contexts, and investigating the role of technology in
enhancing sustainability education effectiveness. For example, leveraging innovative
tools such as the generative Artiﬁcial Intelligence called “ChatSDG”, as discussed
in a recent article by the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business
(AACSB), could offer new avenues for interactive and personalized learning experi-
ences focused of sustainability education (Shinn 2024). By exploring these research
avenues, academics and professionals in HEIs can collectively contribute to trans-
forming the landscape of EE. This collective effort is essential for equipping future
generations with knowledge and skills needed to address global challenges and create
a more sustainable world.
Appendix A
Author’s Proﬁle on the AWorld App
Source Author’s documents (as of 25th April 2024)
494
R. L. Lubis
Integrating the Agenda for Sustainable Development …
495
Appendix B
The Likert Scale Questionnaires
Source Note: Author’s construct
Dear participants,
Welcome to this survey designed to gather valuable insights into your perceptions and
experiences with the AWorld app. The AWorld app aims to enhance your learning
journey by providing interactive features, resources accessibility, and collabora-
tive tools. This survey scrutinizes the app’s integration in Entrepreneurship Educa-
tion courses, assessing its effectiveness in enhancing your grasp of sustainable
entrepreneurship, ethical decision-making, and social responsibility.
By sharing your feedback, you are directly shaping the future of education and
fostering community dedicated to sustainable practices. Your responses will remain
anonymous and conﬁdential. Please answer each question honestly, based on your
genuine experiences and opinions.
Category
1
2
3
4
5
Awareness about sustainability
How strongly do
you agree that using
the AWorld app has
uncreased your
awareness about
sustainability
issues?
Strongly
disagree
Disagree
Neutral
Agree
Strongly
agree
To what extent do
you feel that the
AWorld app has
helped you
understand the
importance of
sustainable
practices in
business?
Not at all
Slightly
Moderately
Very much
Extremely
How effective do
you think the
AWorld app is in
providing
information about
various
sustainability
challenges and
solutions?
Not effective
Slightly
effective
Moderately
effective
Very much
effective
Extremely
effective
(continued)
496
R. L. Lubis
(continued)
Category
1
2
3
4
5
Behavior change
How likely are you
to incorporate
sustainable
practices into your
daily life as a result
of using the AWorld
app?
Very unlikely
Unlikely
Neutral
Likely
Very likely
To what extent do
you believe that
using the AWorld
app has inﬂuenced
your
decision-making
towards more
sustainable
choices?
Not at all
Slightly
Moderately
Very much
Extremely
How motivated do
you feel to adopt
environmentally
friendly behaviors
after using the
Aworld app?
Not motivated
at all
Slightly
motivated
Moderately
motivated
Very
motivated
Extremely
motivated
Sustainable product recommendations
How helpful do you
ﬁnd the sustainable
product
recommendations
provided by the
AWorld app?
Not helpful
at all
Slightly
helpful
Moderately
helpful
Very
helpful
Extremely
helpful
To what extent do
you trust the
recommendation
for sustainable
products offered by
the AWorld app?
Not at all
Slightly
Moderately
Very much
Completely
How likely are you
to purchase
recommended by
the AWorld due to
their sustainability
features?
Very unlikely
Unlikely
Neutral
Likely
Very likely
(continued)
Integrating the Agenda for Sustainable Development …
497
(continued)
Category
1
2
3
4
5
Collaboration on sustainability initiatives
How willing are
you to collaborate
with others on
sustainability
initiatives after
using the AWorld
app?
Not willing
at all
Slightly
willing
Moderately
willing
Very
willing
Extremely
willing
To what extent do
you believe that the
AWorld app
facilitates
collaboration
among users for
sustainability
projects?
Not at all
Slightly
Moderately
Very much
Completely
How likely are you
to engage in group
activities related to
sustainability
through AWorld
app?
Very unlikely
Unlikely
Neutral
Likely
Very likely
Long-term impact
How conﬁdent are
you that using the
AWorld app will
lead to long-term
positive changes in
your awareness of
sustainability
issues?
Not conﬁdent
at all
Slightly
conﬁdent
Moderately
conﬁdent
Very
conﬁdent
Extremely
conﬁdent
To what extent do
you believe that the
AWorld app will
inﬂuence your
behavior towards
sustainability in the
long run?
Not at all
Slightly
Moderately
Very much
Completely
How likely are you
to continue using
the AWorld app in
the future to stay
updated on
sustainability
issues?
Very unlikely
Unlikely
Neutral
Likely
Very likely
498
R. L. Lubis
Appendix C
The Semi Structure Interview Questions
Source Note: Author’s construct
Dear participants,
Thank you for participating in this interview, which aims to gather your valu-
able insights into the upcoming curriculum change initiative and the integration
of the AWorld app into entrepreneurship course at Telkom University’s Master in
Management (MM) program. Your perspectives are crucial in shaping the future of
Entrepreneurship Education (EE) and guiding the implementation of sustainability
research.
AsTelkomUniversity’sMasterinManagementprogrampreparesfortheacademic
year 2025–2026, I am interested in exploring various aspects:
1. Perceptions of curriculum change
I would like to understand your perceptions of the upcoming curriculum change
initiative in the MM program and the potential impact on Entrepreneurship
Education.
2. Integration of the AWorld app
Could you share your thoughts on the integration of the AWorld app into
entrepreneurship courses? Speciﬁcally, how do you believe it enhances the
learning experience for real-world challenges?
3. Valuable aspects of the AWorld app
What speciﬁc aspects of the AWorld app do you ﬁnd most valuable in immersing
students in real-world scenarios related to green business and sustainable
entrepreneurship?
4. Anticipated challenges
What potential challenges do you anticipate during the implementation of
the curriculum change initiative and the integration of the AWorld app into
coursework? How do you suggest addressing these challenges?
5. Envisioning the future
How do you envision the integration of the AWorld app and similar initiatives
shaping the future of Entrepreneurship Education at Telkom University’s Master
in Management (MM) program? What opportunities do you believe they offer for
students and faculties?
Your participation in this interview is highly appreciated, and your responses will
remain conﬁdential. Please feel free to share your thoughts openly and honestly.
Thank you for your time and valuable contribution.
Integrating the Agenda for Sustainable Development …
499
References
Advance HE (2020) Framework for enterprise and entrepreneurship education. https://www.adv
ance-he.ac.uk/knowledge-hub/framework-enterprise-and-entrepreneurship-education-0
Audretsch DB, Belitski M (2020) Entrepreneurship in transition economies. Small Bus Econ
54(2):305–313
AWorld app (2024) Your guide for living sustainably: empowering people to take action against
climate change. https://aworld.org/
Charmaz K (2014) Constructing grounded theory. Sage
Creswell JW, Creswell JD (2017) Research design: qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods
approaches, 4th ed. Sage
Creswell JW, Poth CN (2018) Qualitative inquiry and research design choosing among ﬁve
approaches, 4th ed. SAGE Publications, Inc
D’Arco M, Marino V (2022) Environmental citizenship behavior and sustainability apps: an empir-
ical investigation. Transform Govt: People, Process Policy 16(2):185–202. https://doi.org/10.
1108/TG-07-2021-0118
Fayolle A, Fichter K, Wright M (2019) Cross-cultural perspectives in entrepreneurship education.
Entrep Theory Pract 43(3):409–428
Finlay L, Gough B (2008) Reﬂexivity: a practical guide for researchers in health and social sciences.
Wiley
Gibb A (2011) Concepts into practice: meeting the challenge of development of entrepreneur-
ship educators around an innovative paradigm, the case of the international entrepreneurship
educators’ programme (IEEP). Int J Entrep Behav Res 17(2):146–165
Gielnik MM, Spitzmuller M, Schmitt A, Klemann DK, Frese M (2021) What do we know about
sustainable entrepreneurship? a review of conceptualizations, research methods, and empirical
ﬁndings. Small Bus Econ 56(1):237–291
Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (2024) GEM 2023/2024 Global Report. https://www.gemconsor
tium.org/reports/latest-global-report
Global Schools Program (2024) Case study guide for educators 2024: practicing education for
sustainable development. In: UN sustainable development solutions network. New York. https://
resources.unsdsn.org/global-schools-case-study-guide-vol-2
Guest G, Bunce A, Johnson L (2006) How many interviews are enough? an experiment with data
saturation and variability. Field Methods 18(1):59–82. https://doi.org/10.1177/1525822X0527
9903
Gutiérrez SA, Huilcapi-Collantes C, Tinoco-Giraldo H, Gandara-Tovar AJ, Reyes-Barrera DM
(2021) The pedagogical and user interface usability evaluation of a mobile app that can be used
as a resource to guide university students to live sustainably. In: TEEM’21: ninth international
conference on technological ecosystems for enhancing multiculturality (TEEM’21). https://doi.
org/10.1145/3486011.3486559
Harvard Business School (2024) Social enterprise initiative. https://www.hbs.edu/socialenterprise/
about/
Hockerts K (2017) Sustainable entrepreneurship as a ﬁeld of research. In: Kraus J, Migendt JA (eds)
Sustainable entrepreneurship: a convergent process model. Springer, pp 19–47
INSEAD Executive Education (2024) Developing leaders who can make a meaningful difference
in a sustainable way. https://www.insead.edu/executive-education/partner-programmes/insead-
hans-h-wahl-impact-entrepreneurship-programme-0
Kai Hockerts K, Wüstenhagen R (2010) Greening Goliaths versus emerging Davids—Theorizing
about the role of incumbents and new entrants in sustainable entrepreneurship. J Bus Ventur
25(5):481–492. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0883902609000810
Kuckertz A, Brändle L, Gaudig A, Hinderer S, Morales Reyes CA, Prochotta A, Steinbrink KN,
Berger ESC (2020) Startups in times of crisis—a rapid response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
J Bus Ventur Insights 13:e00169. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S23526734
20300251
500
R. L. Lubis
Laukkanen M, Nagy G (2016) The roles of education, innovation, and institutions in economic
development. In: Hasan MA (ed) Economic development and entrepreneurship in transition
economies. IGI Global, pp 55–77
Ligorio L, Venturelli A, Rosato P, Campo R (2022) Fostering sustainable development goals through
gamiﬁcation. J Manag Organ 2023:1–22. https://doi.org/10.1017/jmo.2023.54
LinkedIn (2022) The LinkedIn global green skills report 2022. https://economicgraph.linkedin.
com/content/dam/me/economicgraph/en-us/global-green-skills-report/global-green-skills-rep
ort-pdf/li-green-economy-report-2022.pdf
Lubis RL (2019) Why eco learning camp in bandung city, west java, Indonesia? ecopreneurs’ and
sociopreneurs’ ideas, purposes, and experiences. J Bus Manag Stud 8(1):13–72
Lubis RL, Ghina A (2020) Are they progressing towards the sustainable development goals (SDGs)
2030? case study of “green leaders ecocamp” and “tel-u ecoheroes” in Bandung City, Indonesia”.
Acad J Sci 10(1):9–52
Lubis RL (2022) From entrepreneurship to sustainable entrepreneurship: why must we care? what
must we do? In: Global higher education in the 21st century. https://doi.org/10.51432/978-1-
8381524-5-1-6
Lv Y, Chen Y, Sha Y, Wang J, An L, Chen T, Huang X, Huang Y, Huang L (2021) How entrepreneur-
ship education at universities inﬂuences entrepreneurial intention: mediating effect based on
entrepreneurial competence. Front Psychol 12:655868. https://doi.org/10.3389/2Ffpsyg.2021.
655868
Merriam SB, Tisdell EJ (2016) Qualitative research: a guide to design and implementation, 4th ed.
Jossey Bass
Muñoz P, Cohen B (2018) Sustainable entrepreneurship research: taking stock and looking ahead.
Bus Strateg Environ 27(3):300–322. https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2000
Mwasalwiba ES (2010) Entrepreneurship education: a review of its objectives, teaching methods,
and impact indicators. Educ + Train 52(1):20–47. www.emeraldinsight.com/0040-0912.htm
Nabi G, Liñán F, Fayolle A, Krueger N, Walmsley A (2017) The impact of entrepreneurship educa-
tion in higher education: a systematic review and research agenda. Acad Manag Learn Educ
16(2):277–299. https://doi.org/10.5465/amle.2015.0026
Oronato F (2020, Sept 23). Sustainability platform AWorld launches mobile app in support
of UN ActNow campaign. https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/sustainability-platform-
aworld-launches-mobile-app-in-support-of-un-actnow-campaign-301136467.html
Patzelt H, Koegst R, Audretsch DB (2020) The role of institutions in the entrepreneurial discovery
process and economic development: lessons from German entrepreneurship policy. Small Bus
Econ 55(2):307–328
Patton M (2015) Qualitative research and evaluation methods, 4th edn. Sage Publications, Thousand
Oaks
Provost M (2023, Oct 10) How colleges are adapting curriculum to prepare students for the
modern job market. https://preminentecounseling.com/how-colleges-are-adapting-curriculum-
to-prepare-students-for-the-modern-job-market/
Rosário AT, Raimundo RJ, Cruz SP (2022) Sustainable entrepreneurship: a literature review.
Sustainability 14(9):5556. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14095556
Sarango-Lalangui P, Santos JLS, Hormiga E (2018) The development of sustainable entrepreneur-
ship research ﬁeld. Sustainability 10(6):2005. https://doi.org/10.3390/su10062005
Saunders B, Sim J, Kingstone T, Baker S, Waterﬁeld J, Bartlam B, Burroughs H, Jinks C (2018)
Saturation in qualitative research: exploring its conceptualization and operationalization. Qual
Quant 52(4):1893–1907. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-017-0574-8
Schaltegger S, Hansen EG, Lüdeke-Freund F (2018) Business models for sustainability: a co-
evolutionary analysis of sustainable entrepreneurship, innovation, and transformation. Organ
Environ 31(1):100–123
Schaltegger S, Wagner M (2011) Sustainable entrepreneurship and sustainability Innovation: Cate-
gories and Interactions. Innov: Categ Interact Bus Strat Environ 20(4):222–237. https://doi.org/
10.1002/bse.682
Integrating the Agenda for Sustainable Development …
501
Shinn S (2024, Mar 19) Using AI to make the world a better place. https://www.aacsb.edu/insights/
articles/2024/03/using-ai-to-make-the-world-a-better-place
Stake RE (2013) Multiple case study analysis. The Guilford Press
Tinoco-Giraldo H, Huilcapi-Collantes C, Gándara-Tovar A, Gutiérrez SA (2023) Towards sustain-
able living: undergraduate training course using AWORLD app as an educational resource.
In: García-Peñalvo FJ, García-Holgado A (eds) Proceedings TEEM 2022: tenth international
conference on technological ecosystems for enhancing multiculturality. TEEM 2022. Lecture
notes in educational technology. Springer, Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-99-0942-
1_101
Tracy SJ (2013) Qualitative research methods: collecting evidence, crafting analysis, communi-
cating impact, 2nd ed. Wiley
United Nations (2015) Transforming our world: the 2030 agenda for sustainable development.
https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/21252030%20Agenda%20for%20S
ustainable%20Development%20web.pdf
Yin RK (2018) Case study research and applications: design and methods. Sage Publications
Zahra SA, Gedajlovic E, Neubaum DO, Shulman JM (2009) A typology of social entrepreneurs:
motives, search processes and ethical challenges. J Bus Ventur 24(5):519–532. https://www.sci
encedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0883902608000529
Integration of the Triple Helix Model
in Sustainability Research. ISOSCAN
as Case Study
Jose Manuel Diaz-Sarachaga
Abstract At the United Nations (UN) Sustainable Development Summit, the UN
2030 Agenda was adopted to push society towards a sustainable development path.
Understanding how to guarantee the well-being of current and future generations
within the limits of the natural world is the overarching goal of sustainability research.
However, rather than deﬁning a research agenda based on sustainability as a holistic
and integrated view, some particular topics, inter alia climate change, green energy,
social sustainability and sustainability education have been individually examined.
Therefore, in an effort to bridge this gap, this chapter introduces the Sustainability
Instituteof Cantabria(ISOSCAN) as anexpressionof theTripleHelixModel inSpain
to face main regional challenges by a comprehensive approach that jointly covers
all sustainability dimensions. To this end, The Regional Development Agency of
Cantabria (SODERCAN) championed a cluster comprising four private companies
and one university of the region. A detailed plan to revitalize the most declining rural
areas of Cantabria was presented as case study to emphasize research through the
collaboration between university, industry and governance.
Keywords Innovation · Partnership for sustainability · Sustainable development
goals · Sustainable entrepreneurship · Triple helix model
1
Introduction
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development was approved by a majority of
member countries of the United Nations in September 2015 (United Nations (UN)
2015) representing a universal call to action in order to achieve the 17 Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) before the end of 2030. As this global appeal was made
to engage all organizations and individuals, the components of the Triple Helix
Model of innovation (THM) are particularly relevant to strengthen collaborations
J. M. Diaz-Sarachaga (B)
Group for Socio-Legal Studies of the Territory and Sustainable Urban Development (GTDS),
University of Oviedo, C/Catedrático Valentín Andrés Álvarez s/n, 33006 Oviedo, Spain
e-mail: diazsjose@uniovi.es
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_28
503
504
J. M. Diaz-Sarachaga
among stakeholders and study the interplays connecting innovation and sustainable
development (Etzkowitz and Zhou 2019). These interactions result in the fourth and
ﬁfth helices regarded by Zhou and Etzkowitz (2021) as a potential disruptive factor
negatively impacting on the THM. Similarly, innovation, science and technology are
three key cornerstones towards the SDGs, further highlighting the contribution of
industry and academia to this purpose (Badillo et al. 2017).
The present world is anchored on the necessity of favoring economic development.
Conversely, entrepreneurial ecosystems are principally created in universities where
teaching is alternated with applied research and knowledge production (Klofsten
et al. 2019). Companies are meanwhile regular demanders of training and research
(Bogers et al. 2018). Universities have thus left their passive attitude aside to become
outstanding players on the social and economic chessboard (Kochetkov 2023). Public
institutions offer regulatory frameworks, budgetary policy instruments and ﬁnan-
cial support to stimulate partnerships between business and academia (Volkmann
et al. 2021), closing the circle around these three major stakeholders. Etzkowitz
and Leydesdorff (2000) theorized the THM to reﬂect the interaction among the
university-industry-government (U-I-G) trinomial in the innovation process. The
university, however, is less important than the two other helices.
Beyond the relevancy of the own helices, their mutual relationship plays a promi-
nent role as well (Ivanova and Leydesdorff 2014). The interactions between society,
environment and sustainability substantiate the inclusion of two additional helices
giving way to the quadruple and quintuple helix models (Carayannis and Camp-
bell 2009; Carayannis et al. 2012) as shown in Fig. 1. Helix models share various
commonalities with complex systems such as inter- and transdisciplinarity, innova-
tion as a nexus between social ecosystems, and the dynamic nature of subsystems.
Furthermore, these models reﬂect diverse interactions among societal subsystems to
foresee their evolution, for which the involvement of academia through research is
essential. Moreover, they outline the engagement of various agents participating in
the innovation process.
Under this context, this chapter aims to shed light on the inﬂuence of the helix
models in the design of a research agenda for sustainability. The next two subsec-
tions describe the contribution of the THM and the N-helix models in sustainability
Fig. 1 Shift from the triple helix model to the quintuple helix model. Source Author
Integration of the Triple Helix Model in Sustainability Research. …
505
research. The case study of the Sustainability Institute in the Spanish region of
Cantabria (ISOSCAN) is presented in the fourth section, whilst the last section
summarizes main conclusions drawn from this study.
2
The Triple Helix Model and Sustainability Research
Figure 2 displays the interactions between academia, industry and government as
per the THM, primarily based on collaborative value creation entailing knowledge
co-creation along with education and funding research (Lew and Park 2021). As
such, it acts as a knowledge center where innovation is the hallmark to generate
new ideas and knowledge (Etzkowitz and Zhou 2017). Universities and research
institutions hence become pivotal actors to develop a knowledge based economy for
which funding is necessary to align socio-economic interests towards the design of
effective policies (Armeanu et al. 2018). Another consequence is the emergence of
a variety of new joint ventures (i.e., industry consortia, entrepreneurship incubators,
public research projects) with common goals (Redman et al. 2021) encompassing
players with distinct interests, motivations and values (Gustafsson and Jarvenpaa
2018).
Socio-economic returns and research systems are the key aspects deemed in the
THM to assess the impact of projects ﬁnanced by institutions and/or companies in
the pursuit of economic development (Ritala and Huizingh 2014). This approach
is related to the concept ‘academic entrepreneurship’ that (Ray 2013) deﬁnes as “a
means of commercialization, which is the transformation of knowledge into products,
processes and organization along with their contribution to economic growth and
innovation”, providing an entrepreneurial dimension to the universities (Galvao et al.
2019). The entrepreneurial capacity of universities relies on a dynamic organization,
but it may be constrained by environmental factors. Setting an organizational culture
with a deﬁned line of thought and clear objectives is crucial to boost academic
entrepreneurship (Klofsten et al. 2019).
Fig. 2 Conﬁguration of the
triple helix model of
innovation. Source Author
506
J. M. Diaz-Sarachaga
This new condition is leading universities to change their practices from teaching
to research and ﬁnally, to innovative entrepreneurship (Brem and Radziwon 2017),
which strengthens the integration and collaboration among the U-I-G triad to build
wealth and a knowledge-based society (Sarpong et al. 2017). Given that the close
relationship between sustainable development and technological progress boosted
by the aforementioned process, the THM turns into an efﬁcient research instrument
to balance the four sustainability dimensions (social, economic, environmental and
institutional).
The contribution of sustainability research transcends the mere generation of
knowledge to propose transformative approaches that assist in the implementation of
sustainability principles into practice (Leal Filho et al. 2023) by integrating multiple
disciplines (Stock and Burton 2011) and developing a normative frame (Schneider
et al. 2019). Approximately two thirds of sustainability research topics are geared
towards curriculum, research, outreach and campus greening (Diaz-Sarachaga and
Longo Sarachaga 2024), the remainder are related to governance and other subjects
such as entrepreneurship, social innovation, management, etc. (Bolger 2021). Despite
the current gaps and further opportunities, sustainability research has received scarce
attention (Wooltorton et al. 2015) and consequently, the development of new theo-
retical frameworks to foster research in sustainability is yet to be addressed (Rau
et al. 2018). The transformative change linked to scientiﬁc practice of sustainability
research (Lawrence et al. 2022) should be accompanied by a collaborative, integra-
tive and reﬂexive approach (Büttner et al. 2023). But the integration of knowledge
is sometimes limited, by dint of the existence of multiple perspectives, views and
values (Beck and Forsyth 2020).
Gibbons et al. (1994) formulated the ﬁrst two models of knowledge to explain
the role of research in the economic development. Mode 1 consists of a linear model
predominantly based on university research without a necessary contribution to
industry. Knowledge was produced focusing on application in mode 2, which in
turn evolves into the THM by considering institutional interactions as a non-linear
model of innovation (Fidanoski et al. 2022). Thus, the THM represents the complex
relationship between university, industry and government. Although university is
regarded as the least powerful helix, the triad is not dominated by a single actor which
would have a negative impact on the generation of ideas and initiatives (Etzkowitz
et al. 2023). On the contrary, the THM is a cooperative partnership oriented to the
promotion of economic growth (Leydesdorff and Smith 2021).
3
Implications of N-Helix Models for Sustainability
Several perspectives have been adopted to compare THM with quadruple, quintuple
and N-helix models. Zhou and Etzkowitz (2021) view helices of the THM as actors
or institutional spheres, as distinct from helices of other N-helix models envisaged
as subsystems. In response, the concept of ‘Triple Helix Twins’ was introduced
Integration of the Triple Helix Model in Sustainability Research. …
507
to supplement the U-I-G THM by incorporating an additional University-Public-
Government (U-P-G) helix model that emphasizes the value of the public dimension
(Cai 2022). Table 1 illustrates the development of the THM. Leydesdorff and Smith
(2021) conceive N-helices as the interaction of a combination of triple helices. This
vision is not shared by Carayannis et al. (2022) arguing that N-helix integrates and
contextualizes the prior N-helix. The sextuple helix in such a way encompasses all
the quintuple, quadruple and triple helices.
The quadruple and quintuple helix models were originally articulated by
Carayannis et al. (2018) in the frame of co-opetitive (portmanteau of cooperation
and competition) innovation ecosystems. These ecosystems are clusters of various
stakeholders with conﬂicting and converging objectives involving social, economic,
institutional or technical dimensions to be managed via entrepreneurial development
in which the core stakeholder is the triad U-I-G, the foundation of the THM.
Veldhuizen (2020) disclosed the evolution of N-helix literature towards sustain-
ability in search of satisfying the needs of the present generation without compro-
mising necessities of next generations by means of technological, social or interna-
tional innovations (Armeanu et al. 2018). But the liaison between helix models and
sustainability was ﬁrstly outlined by Etzkowitz and Zhou (2006) who acknowledged
changes in the physical and social environments due to innovation. Environmental
preservation has gained increased momentum in the ﬁeld of N-helix models (Sunina
and Rivza 2016). In this sense, ecological balance requires the active engagement of
diverse actors that may obtain prominent economic and social outcomes (Grundel
and Dahlström 2016) characterizing a sustainability approach. The limited participa-
tion of social agents in triple-helix research has contributed to evolve THM towards
N-helix models by adding social helices (Höglund and Linton 2018). Table 2 thus
reﬂects as the U-P-G helix model puts the focus on sustainability taking as reference
the U-I-G scheme.
Although the THM has been traditionally employed in distinct contexts, addi-
tional matters were addressed in quadruple and quintuple helix models related to
Table 1 Evolution of the triple helix models.
Helix model
Target
Instrument
U-I-G
Innovation
Research
Entrepreneurship
Technological transference
Knowledge production
U-P-G
Sustainable development
Social innovation
Social entrepreneurship
Research, Knowledge, Technological
transference
Triple helix twins
Innovation and sustainable
development
Above instruments
Source Author
508
J. M. Diaz-Sarachaga
Table 2 Roles of university-industry-government and university-public-government models.
Agent
U-I-G roles
U-P-G roles for Sustainable Development
(SD)
University
Production, dissemination and
application of knowledge
Production, dissemination and application
of SD knowledge
Technological transfer
Consultant for private and public entities
Entrepreneurship
Education and training in SD
Industry
Development and application of
new technologies
Promotion of start-ups
Public
Report negative impacts of industry on
natural resources and environment
Active participation in global endeavors
towards SD, i.e., SDGs
Dissemination of SD knowledge
Government
Make policies for innovation
Reconcile interests of stakeholders for SD
Organize platforms for boosting
innovation
Organize platforms for boosting SD
Act as innovation driver
Act as SD driver
Create spaces for innovation
Create spaces for SD
Source Author
society, sustainable resources, innovation in ecology or smart cities for the former
(McAdam et al. 2016), and environment for the latter (Baccarne et al. 2016). The
quintuple helix model particularly highlights the function of societal and natural
environments in innovation processes. Societal environment consists of individuals
with similar lifestyle, whilst the amalgamation of natural resources, ﬂora and fauna
represents natural environments. Considering that quintuple helix model seeks to
identify opportunities to produce knowledge and innovation intended for tackling
ecological and environmental issues, the protagonism of universities as drivers of
research is to be reshaped. This shift means a more entrepreneurial attitude aligned
to meet social and environmental needs (König et al. 2021).
4
The Sustainability Institute of Cantabria (ISOSCAN)
4.1
Cantabria in a Nutshell
Located in the northern Spain and facing the Atlantic Ocean, the region of Cantabria
covers a land area of 5326.54 km2, by 1% of the country’s surface area, where
forestry (51%) and farmland (40.5%) are predominant. Regional population steadily
increased by 5.6% from 2005 (561,038) to the peak in 2011 (592,393). A slight
Integration of the Triple Helix Model in Sustainability Research. …
509
reduction of 1.3% was then experienced until 2022 (584,708). In Cantabria, residents
live in 102 municipalities clustered in 10 comarcas (ICANE 2024). The city of
Santander is the capital of the region with 172,726 inhabitants.
Gross domestic product (GDP) in 2022 was e15.4 billion (e26,167 per capita),
representing 1.15% of the national GDP, whilst the unemployment rate was 7.48%
of workforce. Service sector, with 55% of the GDP, leads the regional economy,
followed by manufacturing (17%), construction (13%) and the primary sector (3%).
Dairy industry dominates the ﬁrst sector, being Cantabria the ﬁfth milk producer in
the country. Manufacturing is based on foodstuffs, automobile components, chemical
industry and home appliances.
There are two universities in the region. The public university of Cantabria was
created in 1972 to offer a wide range of degrees within graduate, postgraduate and
doctorate programs and be a social, cultural and economic enabler of the region.
Teaching, research and knowledge transfer primarily involve four main areas: water
and energy; biomedicine and biotechnology; banking, ﬁnances and entrepreneurial
activity; and heritage and language. Universidad Europea del Atlántico (Uneat-
lantico) began its activity in 2014 promoting entrepreneurial initiatives and encour-
agingstudentstobecomefamiliarwiththerealworldbydevelopingcreativeandinno-
vative thinking. Collaborative agreements were purposely signed with companies
and individuals in diverse professional areas to build synergies between university,
industry and society.
4.2
ISOSCAN: An Excellent Opportunity to Relaunch
Cantabria
Adopted by the Spanish Council of Ministers on 22 February 2019, the Spanish
Urban Agenda, a strategic document without binding force, aims at aligning the
global commitments included in the 2030 Agenda, the UN New Urban Agenda and
the Urban Agenda for the European Union to the Spanish context. The Sustainability
Institute of Cantabria (ISOSCAN) was originally conceived as an effective research
instrument to assist the Government of Cantabria in the deﬁnition of common guide-
lines to be applied by all municipalities of the region in the achievement of the
Spanish Urban Agenda. And the assessment and monitoring of metrics that allow to
compare performance among municipalities to identify improvement opportunities,
and practices and lessons learned.
Alongside this initial target, ISOSCAN also intends promote and support applied
research as well as the development of studies, methodologies and projects for the
sustainable development of rural and urban areas. Proposals would be ﬁrst imple-
mented in Cantabria to be then exported to other national or international locations.
This pioneering initiative is differential with respect to other actions by integrating
all the sustainability dimensions (social, economic, environmental and institutional)
510
J. M. Diaz-Sarachaga
in solving problems with a direct impact on people under the collaboration of public
institutions and using scientiﬁc method as primary tool.
ISOSCAN posed the following lines of action:
• Implementation of the 2030 Agenda/Urban Agenda in cities.
• Application of intelligent solutions (‘Smart Cities’) in sustainable urban develop-
ment.
• Enhancement of urban resilience as response to impacts of climate change on
urban development.
• Initiatives to foster sustainable tourism.
• Recovery of deprived rural areas through comprehensive sustainable projects.
• Sustainable integration of renewable energy in rural areas.
• Design of a regional productive plan grounded on principles of sustainability and
circular economy.
• Assistance for the use of corporate sustainability reporting in public companies.
• Training of ofﬁcials on sustainable development.
As illustrated in Fig. 3, ISOSCAN comprises six actors in representation of the
university (Uneatlantico), industry (Hurbannia, Star Project Consulting, Inﬁnia and
InstitutodeIngenieríadelCantábrico)andgovernment(SODERCANastheRegional
Development Agency of Cantabria), shaping the U-I-G Triple helix model.
Hurbannia, an entrepreneurial initiative approved on 27th August 2019 by
SODERCAN, was the foundation stone to launch ISOSCAN. Hurbannia provides
comprehensive consultancy services for the design, application and monitoring of
actions in the ﬁeld of sustainable development for the private sector and public admin-
istrations in order to address issues associated to social, economic, environmental and
institutionaldomains.StarProjectConsultingoffersaportfolioofservicesfocusedon
generating added value among public and private entities in strategic areas, inter alia,
business planning; research, development and innovation; optimization of industrial
Fig. 3 Composition of ISOSCAN building on the U-I-G Triple helix model. Source Author
Integration of the Triple Helix Model in Sustainability Research. …
511
processes; marketing; and risk assessment. Inﬁnia specializes in urban sustainability,
namely through accessibility, mobility and eco-urbanism. Other add-on services are
training, project consultancy, construction technical assistance and audit manage-
mentsystem.InstitutodeIngenieríadelCantábricoisanengineeringandarchitectural
ﬁrm mainly renewable energy facilities and environmental management.
4.3
Project to Revitalize the Most Declining Rural Areas
of Cantabria
Industrialization has hastened the decline of the rural world. Spain has been no
exception to this global trend as evidenced by a paltry demographic density in the
countryside, lower than 3 inhabitants per km2. From a total of 8125 municipalities
in Spain, 5000 have a population under 1000 residents, whilst 1286 house less than
100 persons (Diaz-Sarachaga 2020). A dramatic reduction in the population along
with deindustrialization and economic recession characterize the rural decline as
consequence of the population shift to urban areas, which triggers poverty and social
exclusion (Liu and Li 2017). Rural revitalization accordingly emerges as a compre-
hensive and integrated approach seeking economic growth and the improvement of
living quality.
In this context, a strategy on the scientiﬁc method was suggested employing
a participatory process to revitalize some rural areas of Cantabria at severe risk
of depopulation under a partnership scheme that involves governance, industry and
university (Diaz-Sarachaga 2020). A three-stage methodology was outlined in Fig. 4.
Firstly, some areas of intervention were identiﬁed after conducting an in-depth
cross-sectoral analysis. Three working groups discussed and determined diverse
multidimensional actions in the second phase, to be lastly associated to the SDGs.
Fig. 4 Methodology followed to revitalize some rural areas of Cantabria. Source Diaz-Sarachaga
(2020)
512
J. M. Diaz-Sarachaga
Data provided by the Institute for Statistics of Cantabria (ICANE) from 2005 to
2018 about residents, fertile women, workforce, retired people and immigrant popu-
lation were analyzed in the ﬁrst step. Gross domestic product (GDP) per economic
sector, orography of the terrain and prospective development axes connecting rural
and urban areas were additionally evaluated to discover potential economic activities
to be strengthened, land for agriculture, or development priorities, respectively. No
signiﬁcant variation in GDP per capita was observed for rural areas mostly dedicated
to farming. Among all the municipalities of Cantabria, San Miguel de Aguayo (143)
andPesquera(50)accountedfortheleastnumberofpeopleby2030.Intermsoffertile
women, San Miguel de Aguayo showed the highest rate (33.8%), whilst employable
and ageing people (67 and over) were 60.3 and 22.5%, respectively. Similar ﬁgures
for Pesquera, 10 km from San Miguel de Aguayo. Due to the similarity of the topog-
raphy of the studied municipalities, the cluster Pesquera-San Miguel de Aguayo, near
the city of Torrelavega (51,494 inhabitants), was ﬁnally chosen to foster development
in both communities.
For the second stage, a multidisciplinary panel was shortlisted in pursuit of project
proposals to individually handle social, economic and environmental issues. A group
of four regional entrepreneurs on behalf of farming, meat industry, tourism and food
processing industry were appointed to explore economic opportunities. A maximum
of six persons born and resident in Pesquera or San Miguel de Aguayo, including at
least a woman, analyzed main social questions affecting both villages. Environmental
matters were assessed by a wildlife expert, an environmentalist and a practitioner in
renewables, all currently working in Cantabria.
Workshops and the Delphi technique were combined to coordinate insights from
the working team. Three rounds were undertaken from December 2019 to February
2020. In the ﬁrst one, panelists ascertained priorities and the SDGs considered as
cornerstones of the project. A preliminary list of actions was later agreed to be reﬁned
in the third round.
The proposal recommended 52 actions as shown in Table 3. From a total of
169 SDG Targets, 40 targets tied to 10 SDGs were represented in the action plan.
SDG 8: Decent work and economic growth and SDG 12: Responsible production
and consumption gathered the largest number of related SDG targets, with seven
each. Between two and three actions were associated to SDG 9: Industry, innovation
and infrastructure, SDG 10: Reduced inequalities, SDG 11: Sustainable cities and
communities and SDG 15: Life on Land. SDG 13: Climate action, SDG 16: Peace,
justice and strong institutions, and SDG 17: Partnerships for Goals were featured by
a single action. The four sustainability dimensions were present in the plan. Social
initiatives (17) prevailed over environmental (16), economic (11) and institutional
(8) facets.
With the purpose of consolidating the population of both municipalities, job
creation for 30–50 heads of households, aged from 25 to 40, is expected within
the ﬁrst three years to thus accommodate their families in the area. Immigrant and
vulnerable groups with experience in farming are the preferred workers. Family
reconciliation and female labor are also sought. Ecological crops, organic poultry,
agro-tourism, food processing and e-commerce are the key pillars of the productive
Integration of the Triple Helix Model in Sustainability Research. …
513
Table 3 Action plan to revitalize Pesquera-San Miguel de Aguayo.
SDG target/
Dimension
Action
SDG 2.3/
Economic
Use of hydroponics, greenhouses, vertical farms, digitalization
SDG 2.4/
Environmental
Selection of crops according to edaphologic criteria. Installation of soil and
water sensors
SDG 2.5/
Institutional
Collaboration with the Agronomy Research and Education Center of
Cantabria (CIFA) to adapt and cultivate suitable seeds to farmland
SDG 4.4/
Institutional
Internships of students from the training center ‘La Granja de Heras’ in
farming activities
SDG 4.7/Social
Sustainability, social inclusiveness and local identity as the ﬂagship of the
plan
SDG 4.B/Social
Inclusion of a scholarship program to promote education and training for
cooperative members and their descendants
SDG 5.5/Social
As full cooperative members, women will participate in all levels of
decision-making process
SDG 5.C/Social
Elimination of gender gap as stipulated in statutes of the cooperative
SDG 6.3/
Environmental
Farming activities are focused on ecological and organic products
SDG 6.4/
Environmental
Drip irrigation and water sensors to increase water-use efﬁciency
SDG 6.B/
Environmental
Natural resource efﬁciency as a cornerstone of the cooperative
SDG 7.2/
Environmental
Preferential use of biomass and photovoltaic panels as source of renewable
energy
SDG 7.3/
Environmental
Implementation of productive processes oriented to promote energy
efﬁciency
SDG 8.2/
Economic
Diversiﬁcation is based on exclusive local crops, high-quality products and a
unique poultry slaughter plant in Cantabria
Food processing promotes vertical integration
SDG 8.3/Social
Cooperative as the model used to manage the revitalization plan
SDG 8.4/
Environmental
Application of responsible consumption and production practices in farming
SDG 8.5/Social
As a main principle of cooperative associations
SDG 8.6/
Institutional
Creation of a school-workshop targeted at unemployed people
Participation of students from the training center ‘La Granja de Heras’ in
professional practices associated to farming activities
SDG 8.8/Social
Up to a maximum of 50% of cooperative members are migrants and/or
belong to vulnerable groups such as abused women or refugees at risk of
social exclusion
SDG 8.9/
Economic
‘Roman road of Besaya’ to attract visitors
Tourism based on agriculture
Local products and gastronomy as core business
(continued)
514
J. M. Diaz-Sarachaga
Table 3 (continued)
SDG target/
Dimension
Action
SDG 9.5/
Institutional
The Agronomy Research and Education Center of Cantabria (CIFA)
contributes to enhance scientiﬁc research
SDG 9.B/
Institutional
Promotion of knowledge and technology transfer from the two regional
universities and research centers to improve farming activities
SDG 9.C/Social
Development of a smart management network that foster distance learning,
remote elderly health care and services for dependent person
E-commerce initiative “from stable to table”
SDG 10.2/Social
At least 50% of cooperative members are migrants and/or belong to
vulnerable groups such as abused women or refugees
SDG 10.2/Social
Work-life balance measures such as part-time jobs, grants for parents on
care of children, children facilities
SDG 11.3/Social
Cooperative contributes to inclusiveness and social engagement
A yearly multicultural festival serves to showcase customs and traditions
from home countries of new foreign inhabitants
SDG 11.4/Social
Participation of local residents in the school-workshop to protect cultural
heritage
Alternative tourism grounded on natural heritage
SDG 12.2/
Environmental
Application of responsible consumption and production practices
SDG 12.4/
Environmental
Selection of organic and ecological crops that reduce land use and air
pollution
SDG 12.5/
Environmental
‘Zero waste’ policy. Most waste is expected to be used as biomass fuel
SDG 12.6/Social
Sustainability report is part of the annual report issued by the cooperative
SDG 12.8/
Economic
Certiﬁcations and trademarks that associate products to sustainable
attributes and organic practices
Patronage of farm production
Rental of allotments to urban residents to share rural lifestyle
SDG 12.A/
Economic
Circular economy principles towards zero waste bases the rural strategy.
Waste is planned to be used as biomass fuel
SDG 12.B/Social
Sustainability report is part of the annual report issued by the cooperative
SDG 13.2/
Environmental
The balance of carbon is planned by the use of renewable energy
SDG 15.1/
Environmental
The renewal of ecosystems damaged by human activity, the search of the
maximum biological balance in the natural environment and a management
based on soil requirements
SDG 15.2/
Environmental
As forests are the larger provider of biomass fuel, sustainable management
and restoration were considered in the rural plan
SDG 15.3/
Environmental
Ecological farming activities to avoid land degradation
Slope of land lower than 3% for agricultural purposes
(continued)
Integration of the Triple Helix Model in Sustainability Research. …
515
Table 3 (continued)
SDG target/
Dimension
Action
SDG 16.7/Social
Cooperative guarantee total equality between all its members
SDG 17.17/
Institutional
A community work plan is agreed with local authorities to employ
temporary underutilized staff by enhancing ornamentation of villages
Long-term land leases to increase size of plots and avoid land consolidation
Source Diaz-Sarachaga (2020)
model. Milestones in the third, ﬁfth and tenth years were set in the project schedule.
During the ﬁrst triennium, refurbishment of abandoned homes, land preparation
and construction of facilities should be completed for immediately starting opera-
tion. Cooperative model should serve to manage all businesses. Initial proﬁts were
foreseen in the ﬁfth year to reimburse the funding received at the end of the tenth
year.
Despite the fact that the action plan was principally inspired by the U-I-G helix
model, the U-P-G model is also latent. Whilst Uneatlantico (U) helped to identify
the best organic crops for the selected rural areas and design efﬁcient techniques for
food processing, the regional government (G) through the Agronomy Research and
Education Center of Cantabria (CIFA) contributed to increase agricultural produc-
tivity. Cutting red tape for businesses was an additional support from public admin-
istrations. Enterprises (I) involved in the project developed a feasible business plan
with the participation of local residents (P), who in turn discussed social implications
of the arrival of newcomers to the villages. Unlike existing literature most concerned
about theoretical discussions, ﬁndings showcased how conceptual approaches may
be applied to real cases.
5
Conclusions
This chapter ﬁrst analyzed the Triple Helix Model (THM) of innovation as an efﬁ-
cient instrument of collaboration between university, industry and governance to
foster a research plan on sustainability through the joint consideration of social,
economic, environmental and institutional dimensions. Nevertheless, the THM has
been morphed into further N-helix expressions to accommodate other actors. As part
of the N-helix models, research plays a signiﬁcant role and therefore, it has been later
discussed taking as reference the Sustainability Institute of Cantabria (ISOSCAN), an
entrepreneurial initiative to promote sustainable development in the Spanish region
of Cantabria where major challenges are to be tackled. A cluster of four private
enterprises and one university was proposed to this end.
The following conclusions emerged from the action plan designed to revitalize
the most declining rural areas of Cantabria:
516
J. M. Diaz-Sarachaga
• The application of research methodology has been instrumental in the deﬁnition
of proposals related to social, economic, environmental and institutional domains.
• Partnerships are essential in the search of solutions to major issues.
• The participation of diverse stakeholders in the design of sustainable proposals to
face multidimensional challenges suggests not limiting the application of a certain
N-helix model, but the combination of several models.
• Research activities have room in the use of N-helix models.
• N-helix models may also contribute to the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals.
As future line of investigation, the deﬁnition of further helices to complement
existing N-helix models in sustainability research shall be addressed. The implemen-
tation of these models in the promotion of sustainable development is also highly
encouraged.
References
Armeanu DŞ, Vintilă G, Gherghina ŞC (2018) Empirical study towards the drivers of sustainable
economic growth in EU-28 countries. Sustainability 10(1):4. https://doi.org/10.3390/su1001
0004
Baccarne B, Logghe S, Schuurman D, De Marez L (2016) Governing quintuple helix innovation:
urban living labs and socio-ecological entrepreneurship. Technol Innovat Manag Rev 6(3):22–
30. https://doi.org/10.22215/timreview/972
Badillo ER, Llorente F, Moreno R (2017) Cooperation in R&D, ﬁrm size and type of partnership:
evidence for the Spanish automotive industry. Eur J Manag Bus Econ 26(1):123–143. https://
doi.org/10.1108/EJMBE-07-2017-008
Beck S, Forsyth T (2020) Who gets to imagine transformative change? participation and representa-
tion in biodiversity assessments. Environ Conserv 47(4):220–223. https://doi.org/10.1017/S03
76892920000272
Bogers M, Chesbrough H, Moedas C (2018) Open innovation: research, practices and policies.
Calif Manag Rev 60(2):516. https://doi.org/10.1177/0008125617745086
Bolger P (2021) Delivering on the promise: how are sustainability research institutes enabling inter-
disciplinary research? Int J Sustain High Educ 22(8):167–189. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-
10-2020-0415
Brem A, Radziwon A (2017) Efﬁcient triple helix collaboration fostering local niche innovation
projects–a case from Denmark. Technol Forecast Soc Chang 123:130–141. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.techfore.2017.01.002
Büttner L, Darbi M, Haase A, Jax K, Lepenies R, Priess J, Zeug W (2023) Science under pressure:
how research is being challenged by the 2030 Agenda. Sustain Sci 18:1569–1574. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11625-023-01293-5
Cai Y (2022) Neo-triple helix model of innovation ecosystems: integrating triple, quadruple and
quintuple helix models. Triple Helix 9(1):76–106. https://doi.org/10.1163/21971927-bja10029
Carayannis EG, Campbell DFJ (2009) ‘Mode 3’ and ‘Quadruple Helix’: toward a 21st century
fractal innovation ecosystem. Int J Technol Manag 46(3–4):201–234. https://doi.org/10.1504/
IJTM.2009.023374
Carayannis EG, Barth TD, Campbell DF (2012) The quintuple helix innovation model: global
warming as a challenge and driver for innovation. J Innovat Entrepreneurship 1:2. https://doi.
org/10.1186/2192-5372-1-2
Integration of the Triple Helix Model in Sustainability Research. …
517
Carayannis EG, Grigoroudis E, Campbell DFJ, Meissner D, Stamati D (2018) The ecosystem as
helix: an exploratory theory-building study of regional co-opetitive entrepreneurial ecosystems
as quadruple/quintuple helix innovation models. R&D Manag 48:148–162. https://doi.org/10.
1111/radm.12300
Carayannis EG, Campbell DFJ, Grigoroudis E (2022) Helix trilogy: the triple, quadruple, and
quintuple innovation helices from a theory, policy, and practice set of perspectives. J Knowl
Econ 13:2272–2301. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13132-021-00813-x
Diaz-Sarachaga JM (2020) Combining participatory processes and sustainable development goals
to revitalize a rural area in Cantabria (Spain). Land 9(11):412. https://doi.org/10.3390/land91
10412
Diaz-Sarachaga JM, Longo Sarachaga J (2024) Lights and shadows in the operationalization
of sustainability through the 2030 agenda in Spanish universities. Int J High Educ Sustain
25(3):489–513. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-08-2022-0277
Etzkowitz H, Zhou C (2017) The triple helix: university–industry–government innovation and
entrepreneurship, 2nd edn. Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315620183
Etzkowitz H, Dzisah J, Albats E, Cai Y, Outamha R (2023) Entrepreneurship and innovation in the
triple helix: the perspicacity of intermediate ties. Ind High Educ 37(6). https://doi.org/10.1177/
09504222221151122
Etzkowitz H, Leydesdorff L (2000) The dynamics of innovation: from National Systems and “mode
2” to a triple helix of university-industry-government relations. Res Policy 29(2):109–123.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0048-7333(99)00055-4
Etzkowitz H, Zhou C (2006) Triple Helix twins: innovation and sustainability. Sci Public Policy
33(1):77–83. https://doi.org/10.3152/147154306781779154
Etzkowitz H, Zhou C (2019) Chapter 18: triple helix: a universal innovation model? in handbook on
science and public policy. Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, UK. https://doi.org/10.4337/
9781784715946.00029
Fidanoski F, Simeonovski K, Kaftandzieva T, Ranga M, Dana LP, Davidovic M, Ziolo M, Sergi
BS (2022) The triple helix in developed countries: when knowledge meets innovation? Heliyon
8(8):e10168. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2022.e10168
Galvao A, Mascarenhas C, Marques C, Ferreira J, Ratten V (2019) Triple helix and its evolution:
a systematic literature review. J Sci Technol Policy Manag 10(3):812–833. https://doi.org/10.
1108/JSTPM-10-2018-0103
Gibbons M, Nowotny H, Schwartzman S, Scott P, Trow MA (1994) The new production of
knowledge. SAGE Publications, Thousand Oaks, Calif
Grundel I, Dahlström M (2016) A quadruple and quintuple helix approach to regional innovation
systems in the transformation to a forestry-based bioeconomy. J Knowl Econ 7:963–983. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s13132-016-0411-7
Gustafsson R, Jarvenpaa S (2018) Extending community management to industry-university-
government organizations. R&D Manag 48:121–135.https://doi.org/10.1111/radm.12255
Höglund L, Linton G, (2018) Smart specialization in regional innovation systems: a quadruple helix
perspective. R&D Manag 48(1):60–72. https://doi.org/10.1111/radm.12306
ICANE (2024) Instituto Cántabro de Estadística. https://www.icane.es
Ivanova IA, Leydesdorff L (2014) Rotational symmetry and the transformation of innovation
systems in a Triple Helix of university-industry-government relations. Technol Forecast Soc
Chang 86:143–156. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2013.08.022
Klofsten M, Fayolle A, Guerrero M, Mian S, Urbano D, Wright M (2019) The entrepreneurial
university as driver for economic growth and social change—key strategic challenges. Technol
Forecast Soc Chang 141:149–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2018.12.004
Kochetkov DM (2023) International journal of innovation studies innovation : a state-of-the-art
review and typology. Int J Innovat Stud 7(4):263–272. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijis.2023.05.004
518
J. M. Diaz-Sarachaga
König J, Suwala L, Delargy C (2021) Helix models of innovation and sustainable development
goals. In: Leal Filho W, Azul AM, Brandli L, Lange Salvia A, Wall T (eds) Industry, Innovation
and Infrastructure. Encyclopedia of the UN sustainable development goals. Springer, Cham.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-95873-6_91
Lawrence MG, Williams S, Nanz P, Renn O (2022) Characteristics, potentials, and challenges of
transdisciplinary research. One Earth 5(1):44–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2021.12.010
Leal Filho W, Frankenberger Silva F, Salvia A, Shiel C, Paço A, Price L et al (2023) An overview
of research trends on sustainability in higher education–an exploratory study. Int J Sustain High
Educ 24(5):1161–1175. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-08-2022-0252
Lew YK, Park JY (2021) The evolution of N-helix of the regional innovation system: implications
for sustainability. Sustain Dev 29(2):453–464. https://doi.org/10.1002/sd.2143
Leydesdorff L, Smith HL (2021) Triple, quadruple, and higher-order helices: historical phenomena
and (Neo-) evolutionary models. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3817410
Liu Y, Li Y (2017) Revitalize the world’s countryside. Nature 548:275–277. https://doi.org/10.1038/
548275a
McAdam M, Miller K, McAdam R (2016) Situated regional university incubation: a multi-
level stakeholder perspective. Technovation 50–51:69–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.technovat
ion.2015.09.002
Rau H, Goggins G, Fahy F (2018) From invisibility to impact: recognising the scientiﬁcand societal
relevance of interdisciplinary sustainability research. Res Policy 47(1):266–276. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.respol.2017.11.005
Ray J (2013) Academic entrepreneurship. In: Carayannis EG (eds) Encyclopedia of creativity,
invention, innovation and entrepreneurship. Springer, New York, NY. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-1-4614-3858-8_190
Redman S, Greenhalgh T, Adedokun L, Staniszewska S, Denegri S (2021) Co-production of
knowledge: the future. BMJ 372:n434. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.n434
Ritala P, Hizingh E (2014) Business and network models for innovation: strategic logic and the
role of network position. Int J Technol Manag 66(2–3):109–119. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJTM.
2014.064608
Sarpong D, AbdRazak A, Alexander E, Meissner D (2017) Organizing practices of university,
industry and government that facilitate (or impede) the transition to a hybrid triple helix model
of innovation. Technol Forecast Soc Chang 123:142–152. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.
2015.11.032
Schneider F, Kläy A, Zimmermann AB, Buser T, Ingalls ML, Messerli P (2019) How can science
support the 2030 agenda for sustainable development? four tasks to tackle the normative
dimension of sustainability. Sustain Sci 14:1593–1604. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-019-006
75-y
Stock P, Burton RJF (2011) Deﬁning terms for integrated (multi-inter-trans-disciplinary) sustain-
ability research. Sustainability 3(8):1090–1113. https://doi.org/10.3390/su3081090
Sunina L, Rivza B (2016) The quintuple helix model: Way of regional development centers in Latvia
to smart public administration. Res Rural Dev 2:135–142. https://www2.llu.lv/research_conf/
proceedings2016_vol_2/docs/LatviaResRuralDev_22nd_vol2-135-142.pdf
United Nations (UN) (2015) Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Develop-
ment. https://sdgs.un.org/2030agenda
Veldhuizen C (2020) Smart specialisation as a transition management framework: driving
sustainability-focused regional innovation policy? Res Policy 49(6):103982. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.respol.2020.103982
Volkmann C, Fichter K, Klofsten M, Audretsch DB (2021) Sustainable entrepreneurial ecosystems:
an emerging ﬁeld of research. Small Bus Econ 56(3):1047–1055. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11
187-019-00253-7
Integration of the Triple Helix Model in Sustainability Research. …
519
Wooltorton S, Wilkinson A, Horwitz P, Bahn S, Redmond J, Dooley J (2015) Sustainability and
action research in universities. Int J Sustain High Educ 16(4):424–439. https://doi.org/10.1108/
IJSHE-09-2013-0111
Zhou C, Etzkowitz H (2021) Triple helix twins: a framework for achieving innovation and
unsustainable development goals. Sustainability 13(12):6535. https://doi.org/10.3390/su1312
6535
Scientiﬁc Research as a Driver
of the Sustainable Development Agenda:
A 6-year Study of Dissertations
in a Graduate Program
in Administration at a Brazilian Higher
Education Institution
Franciele Pereira Zazycki, João Gabriel Moreira, Henrique Lapa Lunardi,
Ana Regina de Aguiar Dutra, Robert Samuel Birch,
and José Baltazar Salgueirinho Osório de Andrade Guerra
Abstract Growing public awareness of climate change, social inequality, and
economic uncertainties has driven the demand for more responsible business and
government practices. Global movements have been decisive for countries and orga-
nizationstotakeresponsibilityforthedamagebeingcaused,whilepromotingpolicies
that minimize the future impacts resulting from economic expansion. Essentially, this
is the context in which the Sustainable Development Goals of the United Nations’
2030 Agenda was created. Universities play a fundamental role in this agenda, as
they train professionals, contribute to the development of the regions where they
operate, in addition to being catalysts to produce knowledge and the evolution of
science.
The aim of this chapter is to analyze how the scientiﬁc production of the Graduate
Program in Administration at a Brazilian university is aligned with the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). For this purpose, a qualitative analysis was conducted,
F. P. Zazycki · J. G. Moreira · H. L. Lunardi · A. R. de Aguiar Dutra (B) ·
J. B. S. O. de Andrade Guerra
University of Southern Santa Catarina (Unisul), Tubarão, Brazil
e-mail: ana.aguiar@animaeducacao.com.br
F. P. Zazycki
e-mail: franciele.zazycki@animaeducacao.com.br
J. G. Moreira
e-mail: joao.g.moreira@animaeducacao.com.br
J. B. S. O. de Andrade Guerra
e-mail: jose.baltazarguerra@animaeducacao.com.br
A. R. de Aguiar Dutra · R. S. Birch · J. B. S. O. de Andrade Guerra
Center for Sustainable Development Research, New York, USA
R. S. Birch
School of Engineering, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_29
521
522
F. P. Zazycki et al.
involving the mapping of theses and dissertations from the program, in order to
identify those directly addressing topics related to the SDGs. A qualitative approach,
comprising a mapping of theses and dissertations arising from the Graduate Program,
was used to identify those that address the SDG theme directly. This process was
followed by a categorization and quantiﬁcation of the resulting data to generate
a frequency map and bring visibility to areas of sustainability that are receiving
attention from the academic community. This study brings clarity to which SDGs that
are underrepresented in the Brazilian institution’s scientiﬁc production that indicates
possible gaps in its academic research towards the fulﬁlment of the 2030 Agenda.
Keywords Scientiﬁc research · Higher education institution · Sustainable
development · SDGs · Graduate program in administration
1
Introduction
Increasing public awareness of climate change, social inequality, and economic
uncertainties has led to a greater demand for more responsible practices in gover-
nance. Global movements have played a crucial role in pressuring countries and
organizationstotakeresponsibilityfortheharmcaused,whileencouragingtheimple-
mentation of policies to reduce the future impacts of economic growth. It was in this
context that the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) Agenda emerged. Although
widely debated, it is not a simple task to conceptualize the term “sustainable devel-
opment”. However, a widely accepted deﬁnition is that proposed in the report from
the World Commission on Environment and Development: Our Common Future, of
1987, which deﬁnes it as “the development that meets the needs of the present without
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs” (WCED
1987, 42). Waage et al. (2010) proposed a revision of the term, the conclusion of
which demonstrated that to achieve sustainability, all communities need to adapt
to new conditions, considering changes in ecosystems and natural limits to growth.
The importance of abandoning an unwanted reality, such as a polluted environment,
promoting a systemic approach instead of focusing only on the symptoms, was high-
lighted in their research. However, as Leal Filho (2011) demonstrated, it is paradox-
ical that even though sustainability is one of the most relevant and important issues
affecting all contemporary society today, the introduction of the 2030 Agenda and
its SDGs was necessary to emphasize the urgency of conducting academic research
that could support the achievement of these goals (UN 2015).
The scientiﬁc research has the role of developing new approaches that are needed
for the examination of the SDGs in seeking a better understanding of their dissem-
ination and achievement of the objectives. As this is a global issue, the concepts of
the SDGs were outlined emphasizing a collective participation of all nations in the
formulation of the goals to ensure ownership and commitment at local and national
levels(Waageetal.(2010).Tothisend,theyhavebeenconceivedinanopenandinclu-
sive process that ensures this national and local implementation while encouraging
Scientiﬁc Research as a Driver of the Sustainable Development Agenda …
523
international partnerships that are in-line with the dynamics of an evolving global
context. The challenge, according to UNESCO (2014), is that the commitments
being implemented require coordinated changes at multiple levels, i.e., in gover-
nance, planning, academic programs, facilities management and ﬁnancial systems,
and a deeper innovation from staff and cross-institutional development are needed
to transform curricula and pedagogy. In this context, Leal Filho et al. (2018) argue
that the SDGs have represented a signiﬁcant opportunity to revive studies related to
sustainable development, especially in universities. Leal Filho et al. (2019) highlight
several areas of study related to sustainable development that have been elevated to
a new level of relevance due to the implementation of the SDGs and the deadline set
to achieve this agenda by 2030 has created a sense of urgency, spurring high-quality
research focused on these goals.
Inthiscontext,highereducationinstitutions(HEIsastheyfocusontrainingprofes-
sionals and generating scientiﬁc knowledge, play a fundamental role in sustainable
development and knowledge about sustainability (Brusca et al. 2018). Mulà (2017)
perceived that promoting this subject at HEI level fosters dissemination amongst
students who, having been educated to perpetuate the cultural assumptions and
professional practices they explore in their studies, will be assuming responsibilities
in society. Supporting Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) is a commit-
ment to reorient students’ learning experiences so that they understand their profes-
sional responsibilities, capacities and personal motivations (Mulà 2017). The expe-
rience of HEI study can offer insights into sustainability, but they avoid the deeper
challenges to unsustainable practices. It is essential then that the actions of indi-
viduals involved in HEI activities are focused on sustainable development research
and extension; one of the pillars in the production, promotion and dissemination of
knowledge and consolidation of sustainable practices (Leal Filho et al. 2015).
The present research deals with sustainability aiming to demonstrate that scien-
tiﬁc research is indispensable for sustainable development. Scientiﬁc investigation
provides a solid foundation of knowledge, tools, and solutions to address the complex
environmental, social, and economic challenges of today. Through research, scien-
tists can better understand the impacts of human activities on the environment and
society, identify patterns and trends, and develop effective strategies to preserve
natural resources, reduce carbon emissions, and promote social equity. Similarly,
academic scientiﬁc research drives technological innovation, enabling the develop-
ment of new technologies, more efﬁcient industrial processes, and sustainable agri-
cultural practices. Without continuous and targeted scientiﬁc research, it would be
difﬁcult to achieve the sustainable development goals set by the global community,
thus compromising the well-being of present and future generations.
Considering the relevance of scientiﬁc research towards the achievement of the
17 SDGs, the aim of this study is to analyze the approach of themes related to
these goals in the dissertations of students studying in the Graduate Program in
Administration, strictosensu, at theUniversityof SouthernSantaCatarina(UNISUL)
in Brazil, over a period of 6 years from 2017 to 2023. This is a sustainability research
project with the following speciﬁc aims: (a) identify which SDGs are receiving
greater or lesser academic dedication, (b) point out gaps in academic research in
524
F. P. Zazycki et al.
relation to sustainable development, (c) give visibility to the impact of scientiﬁc
research towards the fulﬁlment of the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda, (d)
formulate recommendations to increase the contribution of Graduate Program in
Administration (PPGA) to sustainable development in Brazil.
The research was carried out in two stages. The ﬁrst stage consisted of a structured
bibliographic survey, encompassing pertinent studies on scientiﬁc research as a driver
of the sustainable development agenda. To this end, the Knowledge Development
Process-Constructivist (ProKnow-C) software application was used. In the second
stage of the investigation, qualitative research was carried out by mapping the subject
material of dissertations with the aim of identifying those that addressed themes
directly related to the SDGs. After this, a categorization and quantiﬁcation of the
data was carried out with the purpose of generating a frequency map and bringing a
visibility onto which of the SDGs are receiving greater or lesser attention from the
academic community.
The choice of focus on PPGA was justiﬁed because it is the environment where
science is produced for the management of public and private companies, which are
the fundamental institutions for the implementation of effective practices towards
sustainable development. According to Mascena (2013), organizations should seek
to adapt to the new demands and interests of their stakeholders, including approaches
related to social responsibility, sustainability, business ethics, governance and envi-
ronmental management in their strategic planning and corporate income statement
reports. Kiesnere and Baumgartner (2019) state that studies have shown that compa-
nies must integrate sustainability at all levels, areas, and processes, impacting existing
architectures and corporate culture. Such statements reinforce the importance of
research in administration for the evolution of organizations.
As a contribution, this research sought to provide a clear view of the SDGs that
receive less prominence in the HEI’s scientiﬁc production, identifying potential gaps
for the fulﬁlment of the sustainable development agenda. It is intended that this
mapping encourage the academic community to direct the focus of its scientiﬁc
research in order to accelerate the fulﬁlment of all the SDGs.
2
Methodological Procedures
The methodological framework used for this work can be categorized as exploratory-
descriptive research as it seeks to investigate and describe the characteristics of the
scientiﬁc literature speciﬁc to the sustainable development agenda. In doing so, it
deﬁnes a set of articles and their relationships between bibliometric variables. The
process involved a qualitative-quantitative approach that presents the information
in terms of numerical data, using fundamental statistical methods for analysis, espe-
cially in bibliometrics. During the selection phase of articles for the Bibliographic
Portfolio, the approach was qualitative, since it is based on the individual perceptions
and values of the researchers.
Scientiﬁc Research as a Driver of the Sustainable Development Agenda …
525
2.1
Process for Knowledge Development—Constructivist
Intervention Instrument (ProKnow-C)
To carry out a structured bibliographic survey encompassing pertinent studies on
scientiﬁc research as a driver of the sustainable development agenda, Knowledge
Development Process-Constructivist (ProKnow-C) protocol was used as the main
search instrument. This protocol requires the researcher to select a bibliographic port-
folio within the area of interest, with due consideration to the established delimiters,
so that the articles included in a portfolio have scientiﬁc recognition and are aligned
with the theme of the research (Ensslin et al. 2020). The ﬂowchart of the ProKnow-C
architecture showing the various analytical stages of its application comprising four
distinct phases: (a) selection of a portfolio of articles related to the research topic; (b)
bibliometric analysis of the portfolio; (c) systemic analysis; and (d) deﬁnition of the
research question and objective. For this study, only the ﬁrst phase, the bibliographic
portfolio selection (highlighted in red) was operationalized to select the portfolio of
articles on the research topic. Thus, a portion of the essential knowledge about the
researched topic was acquired (Ensslin et al. 2015; Dutra et al. 2015).
During this stage, the following procedures were performed: (a) the collection
of articles in the databases that form the initial set of articles; (b) an evaluation
and ﬁltering of the collected articles according to the research theme; and (c) the
veriﬁcation of the representativeness of the bibliographic portfolio, involving the
selection and analysis of the bibliographic references of the articles present in it
(Ensslin et al.2010). To begin the process of selecting the initial set of articles it was
necessary to establish the research axes and keywords. This implied a deﬁnition of
the areas of knowledge pertinent to the research, as illustrated in Table 1.
The Boolean expression resulting from the intersection of the sets of keywords
from each axis (areas of knowledge) was created to represent the speciﬁc part of the
literature delimited by the researchers and was used in the search for publications in
Table 1 Deﬁnition of research axes and keywords. Source: Authors (2024)
526
F. P. Zazycki et al.
the databases. The next stage dealt with the selection of the databases in which the
scientiﬁc articles were searched. For the present study, two databases were searched:
Scopus, resulting in 192 articles, and Web of Science, resulting in 151 articles. These
databases were selected with a view to the possibility of access through the Portal
of Journals of the Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education Personnel
(CAPES), the alignment with the research proposal and its importance around knowl-
edge. After completing the identiﬁcation of the areas of knowledge, the keywords
and the databases to be consulted, the process of selecting the scientiﬁc articles to
compile the raw bibliographic portfolio could be carried out. The procedures for this
selection were carried out in December 2023 using combinations of the keywords
deﬁned by each research axis while restricting the search to the article titles. Criteria
were established to restrict the results to the time window of 6 years from 2017 to
2022.
After searching the named databases, a total of 343 articles were obtained as search
results, which were exported to the reference management software, Endnote, for
ﬁltering and selection of the bibliographic portfolio. According to the ProKnow-C
protocol, the process of ﬁltering the raw bibliographic portfolio (shown in Fig. 1)
took various aspects into account such as: (i) the presence of repeated/redundant
articles; (ii) the alignment of the titles of the articles with the theme; (iii) the scientiﬁc
recognition of articles; (iv) the alignment of the abstracts with the theme and (v) the
availability of the full articles in the databases. As the objective of the study was to
gather only relevant articles aligned with the theme, the ﬁrst ﬁlter was to check for
duplicate/redundant references which excluded 109 articles, thus leaving 234 articles
for analysis regarding the alignment of titles. After eliminating the duplicates, the
titles of the articles were read and analyzed, and those in which the researchers did
not identify an alignment with the area of knowledge studied were excluded from
the process. This left 70 articles aligned with the research theme.
After applying these levels of the ﬁlter, the next step was to carry out the analyses
for scientiﬁc recognition. In this research, relevance and scientiﬁc recognition were
characterized by the number of citations received by articles in Google Scholar. As
Fig. 1 Summary of the process for ﬁltering the bibliographic portfolio Source Authors (2024)
Scientiﬁc Research as a Driver of the Sustainable Development Agenda …
527
a convention to determine the relevant articles, the set of articles that represented
90% of the total citations were selected, resulting in 27 articles, being conﬁrmed
as having scientiﬁc relevance. In this way, a Repository K was formed (a bank of
non-repeated articles, aligned title and scientiﬁc recognition). After this, the abstracts
of the 27 articles in this repository were read which resulted in the ﬁnal 23 articles
being identiﬁed as aligning with the proposed research theme and stored in the
ﬁnal Repository A. According to the ProKnow-C protocol, the last stage of analysis
was a representativeness veriﬁcation test which aimed to analyze the bibliographic
references cited in the primary articles of the bibliographic portfolio. This ﬁltering
process did not result in the identiﬁcation of new articles adhering to the theme.
Thus, these 23 articles remained as the primary articles and closed the selection
process of the bibliographic portfolio. This constituted the theoretical portion of the
research to identify and compile a bibliographic portfolio for the theme according to
the perception and delimiters of the research.
2.2
Procedure for Data Collection and Analysis
of the Dissertations of the Graduate Program
in Administration (PPGA)
Following the identiﬁcation and selection of the bibliographic portfolio, the method-
ology advanced to a mapping and analysis stage of the dissertations of the PPGA of
UNISUL. This mapping process was carried out through a survey of the University
Repository of Ânima (RUNA) and treating its contents in two stages using a research
tooldevelopedbythePolytechnicInstituteofTurin(Italy)andareading/classiﬁcation
process carried out by the group of researchers. Subsequently, the extracted data were
consolidated into Excel tables and graphs which facilitated an analysis of the results
and correlation with the bibliographic references in the portfolio. Figure 2 illustrates
the procedure adopted by the researchers in this phase which was divided into four
parts.
– Datacollection:ThedissertationswereﬁlteredfromtheÂnimaUniversityRepos-
itory (RUNA), which aims to manage the intellectual production of the university,
maximise its visibility, use, and impact of its production in the community. RUNA
uses the freeware, Dspace, for data management (see the link https://repositorio.
animaeducacao.com.br/handle/ANIMA/2859).Forthisstudy,thefollowingﬁlters
were applied: UNISUL > Theses and Dissertations > Graduate Program in Busi-
ness Administration > By date of publication. When consulting the results, the
downloaded PDF ﬁles in a drive were shared exclusively among the researchers
for the organisation of the research ﬁles. After this data collection process, the
dissertations were subjected to a ﬁnal reading to ensure their adherence to the
research theme and eliminate any duplication in the database. This resulted in
112 dissertations being identiﬁed between 2017 and 2022. Considering the distri-
bution of the volume of dissertations per year, 19 papers were published in 2017,
528
F. P. Zazycki et al.
Fig. 2 Data collection and analysis structure Source Authors (2024)
13 in 2018, 21 in 2021, 29 in 2020, 25 in 2021 and 5 in 2022, as shown in the
graph in Fig. 3.
– Data treatment: After surveying the dissertations in RUNA, the abstracts were
inserted into the Polytechnic Institute of Turin’s research tool to identify which
SDGs were present in a text via a cross-reference between keywords obtained
in the goals of each SDG. To clarify the procedure, Fig. 4 shows screenshot of
spreadsheet where the information is entered comprising the title of the text,
abstract, author(s), year of publication, main theme of the text, type of publica-
tion (Journal/Book title), presentation of the text at conference and the Digital
Object Identiﬁer (DOI). From the completion of the information, the spreadsheet
Fig. 3 Number of dissertations per year of the PPGA Source Authors (2024)
Scientiﬁc Research as a Driver of the Sustainable Development Agenda …
529
Fig. 4 Example of using the Polytechnic Institute of Turin’s research tool Source Authors (2023)
presents the results automatically providing a “YES” or “NO” in the respective
SDG column.
The application of the Polytechnic Institute of Turin’s research tool identiﬁed
that 36 of the 112 dissertations analyzed mentioned topics related to the 17 SDGs
or to the theme of sustainable development in a more comprehensive way (“cross
keywords”). To exhaust the analysis, the abstracts of the dissertations were read to
deepen the understanding of the topics studied. From this, it was observed that 42
more dissertations dealt with content aligned with the SDGs. These results were
included in the spreadsheet and classiﬁed according to the SDG represented in the
theme. As a result, among the 112 dissertations of the PPGA published between 2017
and 2022, 78 were found to be linked to themes adhering to the SDGs, and 34 have
no correlation with the theme.
– Data consolidation: The data from the spreadsheet produced in the second step
of the analysis were submitted to a triple check to ensure the validity of the
obtained information. After this check, the collected data were reworked into
several spreadsheets and graphs, to increase the visibility and understanding of
the ﬁndings.
– Data analysis: The consolidated results were analyzed and correlated with the
bibliometric research process carried out previously.
3
Results and Discussion
The development of an individual as part of an ever-evolving society naturally
requires the need to seek knowledge to keep up with this progress. Unquestionably,
a university stands out as one of several contributors to personal and social growth
(Goebel and Miura 2004). Through a continuous ﬂow of shared information, a univer-
sity offers a degree and specialization that is critical, reﬂective and ethical, based on
the inseparable link between teaching, research and extension. Andrade et al. (2003)
suggest that, although there are several conceptual approaches, the term ‘Univer-
sity’ can be broadly deﬁned as an extensive network of scientiﬁc-academic-social
communication and experience, interconnected through the sharing of information
530
F. P. Zazycki et al.
that, individually or collectively, aggregates to generate applicable knowledge. As
mentioned, the uniqueness of HEIs is closely linked to other areas and contributes
signiﬁcantly to their own value, in addition to enriching the community, preserving
the environment and boosting economically not only the region in which they are
located, but also their surroundings.
According to Findler et al. (2019), HEIs not only act as catalysts for the production
of innovative knowledge and the advancement of science but also serve as organi-
zations that foster a positive impact on the development of the regions in which
they are situated. Also, universities have inﬂuence in the formulation of sustainable
policies and in the research and development of solutions on the subject (Lozano
et al. 2015). In view of this reality, this work ﬁrst sought to analyse the published
academic scientiﬁc literature and present an external overview that demonstrates
the relevance of the theme behind the aims and objectives of this research. For this
purpose, using a methodology based on the ProcKnow-C analysis application and
using a time window of six years, it was possible to deﬁne a bibliographic portfolio
that supports the relationship to the subject of SDGs in scientiﬁc research. Further
analysis of the RUNA repository valorised the SDGs in the choice of themes of the
dissertations of the PPGA at UNISUL. In the last 6 years, the institution had 112
stricto sensu dissertations published, 78 of which were identiﬁed as being linked to
themes adhering to the SDGs, corresponding to 70% of the total publications of the
program.
As for the distribution of dissertations in the timeline (as shown in Fig. 5), the
highest number was published in 2020 (29 dissertations), followed by 2021 (25
documents). The year with the lowest number of publications was 2022, with only 5
publications being made. This result is justiﬁed because these are works by master’s
degree graduates who enrolled in the course in 2020, the year in which the Covid-
19 pandemic peaked, resulting in a low number of freshmen entering courses. The
frequency of publications of studies on topics related to the SDGs follows the curve
of the overall number of publications, corresponding to 70% adherence in relation
to the total. The year 2019 stands out, with a percentage of 85% of the dissertations
with themes that contributed to sustainable development.
The high frequency of studies focused on topics related to the SDGs in manage-
ment research demonstrates that it is a strategic dimension for companies to drive
long-term growth and proﬁtability, as well as a contribution to the market or commu-
nity in which they operate. Stubbs and Cocklin (2008) point out that organizations
that aspire to ensure a sustainable focus in their business models must build an entire
ecosystem around the theme. To this end, they need to develop internal structural
and cultural capacities, internalizing management principles for sustainability and
encouraging their stakeholders, throughout their value chain, to incorporate strategies
and practices in the ﬁeld of sustainability.
Kiesnere and Baumgartner (2019) emphasize that studies have shown that compa-
nies must integrate sustainability at all levels, areas, and processes, impacting existing
architectures and corporate culture. In their research, they considered three topics that
would inﬂuence the internalization of sustainability in an organization’s culture: (i)
agents of change and motivation; (ii) drivers and results; and (iii) issues of integrating
Scientiﬁc Research as a Driver of the Sustainable Development Agenda …
531
Fig. 5 Dissertations of the Graduate Program in Administration/PPGA Source Authors (2024)
sustainability into the organization. Bhowmik et al. (2018) add that, for sustainable
development, Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) are strategic through the dimen-
sions of education, research, extension, and management. In view of this ﬁnding,
it can be said that research in management plays a crucial role in the evolution of
organizations, the market and society.
Despite the evident relevance of research for economic and social advancement,
this investigation observed that the proportion of dissertations related to the SDGs
remainshighbutstablecomparedtothetotalnumberofpublishedworks.Considering
the merit of the theme, it would be worthwhile for HEIs to invest in increasing the
percentage of research on the SDGs. One way to do this would be to expand the
efforts of HEIs in internalizing the culture of sustainability, which would accelerate
progress in research on the topic and, consequently, contribute to actions towards
achieving the 2030 agenda. In this sense, Serra et al. (2018) reinforce that research
produced in HEIs is essential for building innovative knowledge. The authors also
warn that for scientiﬁc advancement to effectively contribute to regional growth, it is
necessary for companies to have access to and utilize the results of scientiﬁc research
in their practices.
One of the most traditional ways of accessing research from HEIs is through phys-
ical libraries and digital repositories, where investigations are made available to the
academic community and other interested parties. Moreno et al. (2022) reinforce that
libraries play a signiﬁcant role in promoting sustainability, as they directly contribute
to the teaching and learning process, besides being institutions aware of their respon-
sibilities to society. The authors also mention that to consolidate the sustainability
approach in people’s and organizations’ daily lives, awareness and applicability are
necessary.
532
F. P. Zazycki et al.
Taking into account the insights provided by the aforementioned scholars, it
becomes evident that sustainability research could attract more engagement from
researchers through a coordinated effort by HEIs to enhance the dissemination
and accessibility of research ﬁndings. This effort should aim to reach not only the
academic community but also public and private organizations within the community.
As emphasized by Seraﬁni et al. (2022), higher education institutions play a pivotal
role in advancing sustainable development goals. However, achieving this requires
a comprehensive integration of these goals into various aspects of their operations,
including management, education, research, and outreach efforts.
Regarding the focus and volume of research, Bauer et al. (2021) emphasize the
importance of the role of university management, as leaders have the autonomy to
steer scientiﬁc research and teaching towards initiatives necessary to address local
and global challenges. In the same vein, Giesenbauer and Müller-Christ (2020) high-
light that effective governance can manage scientiﬁc resources from various sources,
leading to actions that address complex real-world problems, such as those outlined
in the Sustainable Development Goals. In addition to the visibility on the volume
of dissertations aligned with the SDGs, this research also generated a map of the
frequency in which themes related to the SDGs appeared in the studies, as shown in
Fig. 6.
Figure 7 is a representation of Fig. 6, categorizing the frequency of mention of
the SDGs in the dissertations of the Graduate Program in Administration (PPGA) at
different levels.
Fig. 6 Frequency of SDG in Dissertations Source Authors (2024)
Scientiﬁc Research as a Driver of the Sustainable Development Agenda …
533
Fig. 7 Frequency level of mention of the SDGs in dissertations Source Adapted from Sustainable
Development Goals Report. Special Edition/UN, 2023
Considering the object of study, it was possible to ﬁnd 117 mentions of themes
converging with the SDGs. In 21 citations, more generic expressions were visu-
alized, such as “2030 Agenda”, “sustainable development goals” or “sustainabil-
ity”. Also with 21 appearances, SDG 16 was the most observed. As it is about
“Promoting peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, providing
access to justice for all and building effective, accountable and inclusive institutions
at all levels”, the theme has a lot of adherence to the research themes chosen by the
master’s students in Administration, who researched subjects related to management
models, governance, performance and social innovation, with a view to improving
the community impacted by the public and private companies investigated.
SDG 4 (Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong
learning opportunities for all) emerged in 16 mentions, reinforcing the relevance that
the academic community has on sustainable development. According to Jarchow
et al. (2018), research plays a strategic role in student engagement where institutions
should direct sustainability investments towards leveraging this area. Despite having
high relevance and a high frequency of publications in this study, SDG 4 still lacks
encouragement in research and actions, as it exhibits one of the most unsatisfactory
performances according to the results presented in the Sustainable Development
Goals Report Special Edition, 2023.
The third most observed SDG in the dissertations was SDG 9, “Build resilient
infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization, and foster inno-
vation”. This occurrence is related to the fact that the region where the university
is located is considered an innovation hub in the country and, therefore, the inves-
tigated entrepreneurs are attentive to the creation of more inclusive and sustainable
processes.
534
F. P. Zazycki et al.
SDGs with low occurrence in the PPGA studies (from 2017 to 2022), are SDGs
2 (Zero hunger and sustainable agriculture), 5 (Gender equality) and 6 (Clean water
and sanitation), with only 1 occurrence of each of these in the dissertations. The
contents related to SDGs 13 (Action against global climate change), 14 (Life below
water) and 15 (Life on land) were not identiﬁed in any PPGA dissertation while SDG
10 (Reduce inequality within and between countries) occurs only twice. At the stage
of reading these texts, it was possible to verify that these studies selected objects of
local or regional interest, which may have had an impact on the absence of the themes
mentioned above, since they are more relevant and understood as global indicators.
The research gap on the SDGs 2, 5, 6, 10, 13, 14, and 15 has been identiﬁed in
this study, prompting reﬂection on actions to address this scarcity. One possibility
mentioned in the literature is the clear direction of university leadership towards
incentivizing research on SDGs, following the example of how research efforts
were directed during the COVID-19 pandemic (Leal Filho et al. 2022). During this
period, university administrators kept research active and prominent, which propelled
scientiﬁc knowledge to tackle the challenges of the moment.
According to the Sustainable Development Goals Report 2023 (UN, 2023),
humanity’s ability to use science, technology, and innovation to address crises
in transformative ways and promote the public good became evident during the
pandemic. Thus, the strategies that were effective can be replicated to achieve the
goals of the 2030 Agenda. One of the catalysts was the increase in ﬁnancial invest-
ments in research. According to the report, global expenditures on research and
development as a proportion of GDP increased from 1.69 percent in 2015 to 1.93
percent in 2020, and the number of researchers per million inhabitants increased
from 1,160 in 2015 to 1,342 in 2020. Therefore, it recommends the development of
effective policies to stimulate investment in research and to increase the number of
researchers in sustainable development, especially in developing economies.
In addition to resulting in a clear map of the frequency of research by SDG, this
study found that many research projects deal with themes relevant to the SDGs,
however, they do not directly cite them. This fact points to the still evident need
for greater understanding of sustainability concepts and the 2030 agenda within the
university environment. A study conducted at a university in the southern region
of Brazil (Gazzoni et al. 2018) found that sustainable development is not yet fully
integrated among staff, in terms of understanding the concepts of the theme, being
informed about the institution’s projects, as well as practicing behaviors aligned
with sustainability in their routine. On this, Kolb et al. (2017) emphasize the impor-
tance of training university workers so that they develop the necessary competen-
cies for effective support of the campus’s research and teaching practices towards
sustainability.
Ribeiro et al. (2021) warn that the basic concepts and principles of sustainability
are still misunderstood or understood superﬁcially, even among an educated popu-
lation. This ﬁnding was the result of their research with students from HEIs in Santa
Catarina, Brazil, including UNISUL (i.e., the object of this study), which may also
explain the fact that many dissertations discuss topics intrinsic to the achievement
of the SDG goals, but without mentioning the SDG itself. These same authors found
Scientiﬁc Research as a Driver of the Sustainable Development Agenda …
535
that HEIs are involved in building knowledge and increasing awareness of sustain-
able development, identifying that research is the most effective tool for this purpose.
In view of this statement, and considering the results found, this study generated a
set of recommendations for HEIs, that are aimed at that their Graduate Programs
contributing exponentially to the achievement of the SDGs.
One of the recommendations is to provide training and ensure clear, in-depth and
accessible information to all audiences of HEIs about the SDGs and the impacts that
each of these can generate individually. Regarding raising awareness and dissemi-
nating information on sustainable issues, HEIs have the capacity to integrate sustain-
ability related content into their academic programs, carry out awareness campaigns,
and use their communication channels, such as websites and social networks, to
disseminate good practices and pertinent information (Leal Filho et al. 2023).
Far beyond communication, it is recommended that HEIs develop strategic plan-
ning, with the consequent establishment of tangible goals and performance indi-
cators. Performance measurement promotes a detailed assessment of the progress
made against each SDG and allows the identiﬁcation of gaps for action. In addi-
tion to establishing indicators, the transparent disclosure of results allows all those
involved to contribute to the implementation of future actions and investments. It also
gives visibility to the themes that require greater incentive to carry out research and
interventions, with the purpose of directing efforts. For the governance of this recom-
mendation, it is pertinent to consider the suggestions of key factors by Abubakar et al.
(2020), which are: (i) the development of a clear vision, policy, and strategic plan for
sustainability for the respective HEI; (ii) the implementation of SD goals in research,
education, outreach, partnerships, and campus operations.
Another recommendation is the integration between researchers from different
graduate programs. This action encourages multidisciplinary research and projects
focused on the SDGs, under the maxim that collaboration provides the exchange of
knowledge, resources and experiences, thus expanding the impact and contribution to
sustainabledevelopment.Similarly,itisrecommendedtopromoteknowledgebeyond
national barriers, through international partnerships with educational and research
institutions around the world, in order to share good practices related to the SDGs.
The internationalization of the program and research stimulates interdisciplinarity
and multidisciplinary working. Collaboration between different areas of knowledge
and multiple regions is essential to address the complexity of socio-environmental
challenges. HEIs should encourage interaction between researchers and students
from diverse disciplines, creating an environment conducive to the exchange of ideas
and the development of integrated solutions. Another suggestion is to encourage the
engagementofexternalstakeholders,involvingcivilsocietyorganizations,theprivate
sector, governments, and local communities in research activities, which can broaden
the reach of initiatives and ensure a more comprehensive and inclusive approach.
In their study, Fuchs et al. (2023) also recommend the establishment of part-
nerships between HEIs, the local community, and the private and public sectors in
a collective effort for sustainable development. The scholars highlight the need to
disseminate scientiﬁc knowledge on SD beyond the classroom and assign to HEIs
the responsibility of promoting spaces and tools for this purpose. Giesenbauer and
536
F. P. Zazycki et al.
Müller-Christ (2020) emphasize the importance of leadership in providing platforms
that allow for co-creation and collaboration among faculties and knowledge areas,
thus broadening the impact of their initiatives.
It is recommended to strengthen the institutional commitment of the HEI and the
graduate programs to the SDGs by establishing a clear and comprehensive commit-
menttotheSDGs.Thismeansaligningtheirmissions,visionsandstrategicplanswith
the principles and goals of the 2030 agenda and involves integrating the SDGs into the
developmentplansoftheinstitutionanditsprogramstoensureresearch,teaching,and
extension activities are aligned with these goals. To leverage the chances of success,
an effective management process must be the compass towards more sustainable
universities and societies. Finally, according to Seraﬁni et al. (2022), this theme will
receive more attention in research agendas as guides are published that encourage
dialogues on how universities are stages for the generation of knowledge and practical
experience of guidelines for sustainable development.
4
Conclusion
Growing awareness of climate change, social inequality, and economic uncertainties
has driven greater demand for more ethical and sustainable business and government
practices. Global movements have played a crucial role in pressuring countries and
organizations to take responsibility for the damage caused, while advocating policies
that reduce the future impacts resulting from economic growth. This context was
fundamental for the creation of the SDGs Agenda.
In this context, HEIs play a fundamental role, as they are organizations that
generate a positive impact on the development of the regions where they are located,
in addition to being catalysts to produce innovative knowledge and the evolution
of science. In addition, HEIs also have inﬂuence in the formulation of sustainable
policies and in the research and development of solutions on the subject. Consid-
ering this social function of HEIs and the relevance of scientiﬁc research towards
the achievement of sustainable development goals, this study aimed to analyze the
approach of themes related to the 17 SDGs of the United Nations in the dissertations
of the Graduate Program in Administration, stricto sensu, of a Brazilian university,
in a period of 6 years (from 2017 to 2023).
As speciﬁc aims, it was sought to (a) identify which SDGs are receiving greater
or lesser academic dedication, (b) point out gaps in academic research in relation
to sustainable development, (c) give visibility to the impact of scientiﬁc research
towards the fulﬁlment of the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda, (d) formulate
recommendations to increase the contribution of PPGA to sustainable development
in Brazil. These aims were addressed in the “Results and Discussion” section, where
it was possible to observe the solid research work conducted, adding relevance to
this chapter. Thus, the main objective of this chapter of the book, to analyze how
the scientiﬁc production of the Graduate Program in Administration at a Brazilian
university aligns with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), was achieved.
Scientiﬁc Research as a Driver of the Sustainable Development Agenda …
537
Initially, exploratory-descriptive research was carried out for the construction of
a theoretical framework, using the Knowledge Development Process-Constructivist
(ProKnow-C) tool as a method for the investigation of the theme. After searching the
named databases, a total of 343 articles were obtained as search results, which were
exported to the reference management software Endnote for ﬁltering and selection
of the bibliographic portfolio. In the process of ﬁltering raw articles (Fig. 2). This
resulted in a ﬁnal bibliographic portfolio of 2 articles. In a second stage employed
a qualitative research process to create a map of the theses and dissertations of the
stricto sensu programs at UNISUL that aimed to identify which of them address
themes directly related to the SDGs so that, after categorization and quantiﬁcation
of the data, it became possible to create a frequency map and bring visibility to the
areas of sustainability that are receiving more academic attention. In all, 112 (one
hundred and twelve) dissertations were analyzed, where it was possible to observe
that the most cited SDGs were 16, 4 and 9. The SDGs with the lowest representation
were 13, 14 and 15, which were not mentioned in any of the dissertations. However,
it can be considered that SDGs 2, 5, 6 and 10 also represent gaps, as they received
only 1 or 2 mentions.
As a contribution, the study brought clarity about the SDGs that are underrep-
resented in the institution’s scientiﬁc production, pointing out gaps in academic
researchtowardsthefulﬁlmentoftheSustainableDevelopmentAgenda.Theresearch
offered signiﬁcant contributions to the literature by describing the current situation
of the PPGA, about the integration of the dimensions of social innovations and
sustainable development aligned with the United Nations 2030 Agenda. In addition,
this work developed a strategic map on how this program of work has addressed
these issues, as well as the current stage of promoting sustainability through its
research. Another relevant contribution was the analysis of the recommendations
to enhance the contribution of a HEI and the PPGA to sustainable development in
Brazil. This analysis focused on the communication of each of the 17 SDGs showing
that, although the HEIs may demonstrate a certain degree of commitment to these
goals, not all of them explicitly mention the corresponding SDGs.
It was observed that the works ﬁltered in the bibliographic research present a
literature review for subjects that deal with the SDGs in education, without any of
them proposing to make the list of the SDGs, as the objective of this work. This
is a suggestion that can be applied to future work, giving visibility to the demands
of research in graduate programs. A difﬁculty encountered in the methodological
was the limitation of the tool for identifying the SDGs, which can be attributed to a
restricted number of keywords, the exclusive use of words instead of sentences, or
even cultural adequacy. To ensure the validity of the results and, since it is based on
using a research instrument developed in Italy, all dissertations were submitted to a
reading of the contents. This enabled the understanding of which texts really had a
connection with the SDGs. This fact made it possible to discover that there is still a
demand for the development of a more assertive tool for identifying the SDGs in the
texts.
A shortcoming of this study was the restriction to only one |Graduate Program in
Administration at a university, which restricts the results to a local reality. This gap
also presents a good opportunity for future research, including a greater number of
programs, universities and regions, generating a broader map and encouraging work
538
F. P. Zazycki et al.
with a greater multidisciplinary approach and breadth, which is more aligned with
the complexity of the theme of sustainable development.
Finally, the differential of this work is the applicability of its results, as they were
presented to the leadership of the university and the Graduate Program in Adminis-
tration, generating awareness and commitment to the implementation a management
process and monitoring of the evolution of research, towards the fulﬁlment of the
SDGs.
Acknowledgements We gratefully acknowledge the contributions of several institutions in the
successful completion of this study. The research was carried out by the Centre for Sustainable
Development (Greens) in collaboration with the Graduate Program in Administration at the Univer-
sityofSouthernSantaCatarina(Unisul).WealsoextendourappreciationtotheFundaçãodeAmparo
à Pesquisa e Inovação do Estado de Santa Catarina (FAPESC), Ânima Institute (AI), Coordenação
de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES), and the National Council for Scientiﬁc
and Technological Development (CNPq) for their invaluable support and assistance throughout the
research process.
References
Bauer M, Rieckmann M, Niedlich S, Bormann I (2021) Governança da sustentabilidade nas
instituições de ensino superior: equipadas para transformar? Fronteiras Na Sustentabilidade
2:640458
Brusca I, Labrador M, Larran M (2018) The challenge of sustainability and integrated reporting at
universities: a case study. J Clean Prod 188:347–354
Dutra A, Ripoll-Feliu VM, Fillol AG, Ensslin SR, Ensslin L (2015) The construction of knowledge
from the scientiﬁc literature about the theme seaport performance evaluation. Int J Product
Perform Manag 64(2):243–269
Ensslin L, Ensslin SR, Lacerda RDO, Tasca JE (2010) ProKnow-C, knowledge development
process-constructivist. Processo técnico com patente de registro pendente junto ao INPI. Brasil,
10(4)
Ensslin L, Mussi CC, Chaves LC, Demetrio SN (2015) It outsourcing management: the state of
the art recognition by a constructivist research process and bibliometrics. JISTEM-J Inf Syst
Technol Manag 12:371–392
Ensslin L, Mussi CC, Dutra A, Ensslin SR, Demetrio SN (2020) Management support model for
information technology outsourcing. J Glob Inf Manag 28(3):123–147
Findler F, Schönherr N, Lozano R, Reider D, Martinuzzi A (2019) The impacts of higher education
institutions on sustainable development: a review and conceptualization. Int J Sustain High Educ
20(1):23–38
Gazzoni F, Scherer FL, Hahn IS et al. (2018) O papel das IES no desenvolvimento sustentável:
estudo de caso da Universidade Federal de Santa Maria. Revista gestão universitária da América
latina—GUAL, Florianópolis 11(1):48–70
Giesenbauer B,. e Müller-Christ G (2020) Universidade 4.0: promover a transformação das insti-
tuições de ensino superior em direção ao desenvolvimento sustentável. Sustentabilidade 12(8):
3371
Goebel MA, Miura MN (2004) A universidade como fator de desenvolvimento: o caso do município
de Toledo-PR. Revista Expectativa 3(1)
Jarchow CJ, Didan K, Barreto-Muñoz A, Nagler PL, Glenn EP (2018) Application and comparison
of the MODIS-derived enhanced vegetation index to VIIRS, landsat 5 TM and landsat 8 OLI
platforms: a case study in the arid colorado river delta, Mexico. Sensors 18(5):1546
Scientiﬁc Research as a Driver of the Sustainable Development Agenda …
539
Kiesnere AL, Baumgartner RJ (2019) Sustainability management emergence and integration on
different management levels in smaller large-sized companies in Austria. Corp Soc Responsib
Environ Manag 26(6):1607–1626
Kolb M, Fröhlich L, e Schmidpeter R (2017) Implementando a sustentabilidade como o novo
normal: Educação em gestão responsável—na perspectiva de uma escola de negócios privada.
Int J Manag Edu 15(2, Parte B):280–292
Leal Filho W (2011) About the role of universities and their contribution to sustainable development.
High Educ Pol 24:427–438
Leal Filho W, Shiel C, Paço AD (2015) Integrative approaches to environmental sustainability at
universities: an overview of challenges and priorities. J Integr Environ Sci 12(1):1–14
Leal Filho W, Azeiteiro U, Alves F, Pace P, Mifsud M, Brandli L, Disterheft A (2018) Reinvigorating
the sustainable development research agenda: the role of the sustainable development goals
(SDG). Int J Sust Dev World 25(2):131–142
Leal Filho W, Will M, Salvia AL, Adomssent M, Grahl A, Spira F (2019) The role of green and
Sustainability Ofﬁces in fostering sustainability efforts at higher education institutions. J Clean
Prod 232:1394–1401
Leal Filho W, Salvia AL, Abubakar IR, Mifsud M, Azadi H, ShariﬁA, LeVasseur T, Luetz JM,
Velazquez L, Singh P, Pretorius R, Lombardi P (2022) Impactos da pandemia da COVID-
19 nas rotinas das instituições de ensino superior: uma perspectiva global. Sustentabilidade
14(21):14105
LealFilhoW,SalviaAL,EustachioJHPP(2023)Anoverviewoftheengagementofhighereducation
institutions in the implementation of the UN Sustainable Development Goals. J Clean Prod
386:135694
Lozano R, Ceulemans K, Alonso-Almeida M, Huisingh D, Lozano FJ, Waas T, Lambrechts
W, Lukman R, Hugé J (2015) A review of commitment and implementation of sustainable
development in higher education: results from a worldwide survey. J Clean Prod 108, Part
A:1–18
Mascena KMCD (2013) Priorização de stakeholders: um estudo em empresas que divulgam
relatórios com a estrutura da Global Reporting Initiative-(GRI) no Brasil (Doctoral dissertation,
Universidade de São Paulo)
Mulà I, Tilbury D, Ryan A, Mader M, Dlouhá J, Mader C, Alba D (2017) Catalysing change in
higher education for sustainable development: a review of professional development initiatives
for university educators. Int J Sustain High Educ 18(5):798–820
Ribeiro JMP, Hoeckesfeld L, Dal Magro CB, Favretto BRJ (2021) Green Campus Initiatives as
sustainable development dissemination at higher education institutions: students’ perceptions.
J Clean Prod 312:127671
Serra M, Rolim C, Bastos AP (org) Universidades e Desenvolvimento Regional: as bases para a
inovação competitiva. Rio de Janeiro: Ideia D, 2018
Seraﬁni PG, De Morais MJ, De Almeida MR, de Rezend JFD (2022) Sustainable development goals
in higher education institutions: a systematic literature review. J Clean Product 370(10):133473
Stubbs W, Cocklin C (2008) Conceptualizing a “Sustainability Business Model.” Organ Environ
21:103–127
UN. United Nations (2015). https://sdgs.un.org/goals
UNESCO (2014) Shaping the Future We Want: UN Decade of Education for Sustainable Develop-
ment. Final Report, UNESCO, Paris. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002303/230302e.
pdf
Waage J, Banerji R, Campbell O, Chirwa E, Collender G, Dieltiens V, Unterhalter E (2010)
The millennium development goals: a cross-sectoral analysis and principles for goal setting
after 2015: Lancet and London international development centre commission. The Lancet
376(9745):991–1023
WCED. World Commission on Environment and Development. (1987) Our Common Future.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/content/documents/
5987our-common-future.pdf
Co-Creation and Participatory Research:
Climate Assemblies in Schools
as a Means to Sustainability Transitions
Anna Boqué-Ciurana, Gisela Cebrián, and Jon Xavier Olano
Abstract To promote new ways of life and sustainable social practices, people
and communities must be able to engage in community learning and sustainability
research processes that promote environmental awareness and action, as well as
the acquisition of new sustainability knowledge and competencies. This contribu-
tion presents school climate assemblies, conceived as a co-creation and participa-
tory sustainability research practical approach. School climate assemblies are inno-
vative democratic processes to learn, deliberate, make decisions, and seek solu-
tions for change climate and local and regional sustainability. Thus, climate assem-
blies are understood as a new form of participatory sustainability research that can
contribute to the co-creation of climate change mitigation and adaptation strategies
within educational communities and the development of sustainability competen-
cies amongst students, and in turn inﬂuence policy making, through identifying
actions, priorities and indicators for which community learning and action can make
a real contribution to climate change and sustainability. This chapter presents a
practical participatory sustainability research approach, school climate assemblies
designed and implemented within the EDUCLIMAD project, where the theoretical
and methodological conceptualisation and groundings are outlined, including the
key elements, main phases and outcomes in the co-creation of climate change miti-
gation and adaptation strategies and transformative and community learning towards
sustainability.
Keywords Co-creation · Participatory research · School climate assemblies ·
Community learning
A. Boqué-Ciurana
Centre for Climate Change, C3, Geography Department, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, 43480
Vila-Seca, Tarragona, Spain
A. Boqué-Ciurana · G. Cebrián (B) · J. X. Olano
Institut Universitari de Recerca en Sostenibilitat, Canvi Climàtic I Transició Energètica
(IU-RESCAT), 43480 Vila-Seca, Tarragona, Spain
e-mail: gisela.cebrian@urv.cat
G. Cebrián
Educational Transformation, Leadership & Sustainability, Department of Pedagogy, Universitat
Rovira i Virgili, 43007 Tarragona, Spain
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_30
541
542
A. Boqué-Ciurana et al.
1
Introduction
The crucial importance of education in building a more sustainable, fair, and socially
just society is widely acknowledged by national and international organizations
(European Commission 2022; UNESCO 2005; United Nations 2012). Educational
institutions at all levels, starting from preschool and extending to higher education,
should equip learners with the necessary knowledge, values, and skills related to
sustainability. This preparation is essential for empowering individuals to effectively
address present and future sustainability challenges in a constructive, accountable,
and collaborative manner (Leicht et al. 2018; UNESCO 2017; Wals and Lenglet
2016).
Various regional and global initiatives have aimed to encourage and expand the
integrationofEducationforSustainableDevelopment(ESD)andlearningforsustain-
ability across education systems on a global scale. ESD is rooted in values such as
justice, equity, tolerance, and responsibility, emphasizing collaborative and dialogic
approaches that encompass systemic thinking, critical reﬂection, the utilization of
innovative methodologies, and active and participatory learning processes (Cebrián
and Junyent 2015).
On a global level, it is vital to highlight the United Nations Decade of Education
for Sustainable Development (UNDESD 2005–2014), its subsequent Global Action
Programme (GAP), and the framework entitled “Education for Sustainable Devel-
opment: Towards Achieving the SDGs” (ESD for 2030) (UNESCO 2005, 2014,
2020). The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, adopted by member states
in 2015, introduced 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) to be achieved by
2030, and reafﬁrmed education’s pivotal role as a fundamental agent for promoting
sustainable lifestyles and cultivating sustainability competencies among individuals
(United Nations 2015). Target 4.7 within SDG 4—Quality Education, underscores
the importance of ensuring that all learners acquire the necessary knowledge and
skills to promote sustainable development. This includes recognizing the relevance
of ESD, sustainable lifestyles, human rights, and global citizenship, among other
aspects (UNESCO 2017). The ESD for 2030 framework has identiﬁed ﬁve priority
action areas to achieve the 17 SDGs and the necessary social transformation, which
encompass policy advancement, learning environments, educator competencies, and
youth and community-based action (UNESCO 2020). This chapter presents a prac-
tical participatory sustainability research approach, school climate assemblies, which
seeks to engage and empower children and youth and their educational communities
in the co-creation of climate change and sustainability solutions.
Furthermore, in recent decades there has been a growing academic interest in
shaping and reﬁning frameworks for sustainability competencies in education. These
competencies are generally understood as a blend of cognitive abilities, practical
skills, and ethical values necessary to develop in citizens the required capacities to
effectively address current and future sustainability challenges (Bianchi et al. 2022;
Brundiers et al. 2021; de Haan 2006). Over time, multiple frameworks for sustain-
ability competencies have been formulated, which coexist among them and also
Co-Creation and Participatory Research: Climate Assemblies …
543
show a general consensus on the essential competencies that facilitate individual
and societal transitions toward sustainability. These include problem-solving, inter-
personal competence, systems thinking, future thinking, action-oriented approaches,
and strategic and value-driven competencies (Brundiers et al. 2021; Shephard et al.
2015; Wiek et al. 2011).
Recent studies on transformative learning for sustainability advocate for devel-
oping more blended and participatory pedagogies involving various actors and
perspectives (Lotz-Sisitka et al. 2015). This entails establishing open and transdis-
ciplinary learning environments (Bürgener and Barth 2018) and exploring the inter-
play and connections between cultural traditions and innovation (Tilbury 2011; Mulà
et al. 2022). Achieving this goal involves linking formal, non-formal, and informal
learning; establishing social learning spaces that address the diversity of values
and ideas; questioning the roles and relationships among educators, learners, and
stakeholders; and reconsidering the teaching and learning methods used to promote
learning for sustainability and ﬁnding appropriate assessments paths. This involves
questioning the conventional learning process and curriculum design and reeval-
uating how sustainability competencies can be most effectively nurtured. In this
context, the literature emphasizes the need for integrating learning with the local
community to instil a sense of environmental connection and involve individuals in
climate change and sustainability initiatives (Green and Somerville 2015; Symons
2008). Active student participation in community learning and action becomes essen-
tial, taking the form of service-learning programs, educational-community projects,
and collaborations facilitated by the active involvement of various stakeholders,
offering and sharing diverse perspectives and knowledge from both within and
outside academia (Anderson and Jacobson 2018; Östman et al. 2019; Taylor et al.
2019; UNESCO 2017). As highlighted in previous research, support from fami-
lies, the community, and local authorities plays a fundamental role in engaging the
students and the entire educational community in sustainability efforts (Evans et al.
2012; Symons 2008).
Establishing a connection between students’ experiences, sustainability issues,
and decision-making processes is vital for fostering transformative learning that
promotes pro-environmental attitudes, behaviours, and choices (Jucker and Mathar
2015). Additionally, there is scientiﬁc evidence suggesting that students and youth
have the potential to act as catalysts for change within their societies, as shown by the
emergence of youth-led social movements advocating for sustainability and climate
action, such as Fridays for Future (Biasutti 2015; Deisenrieder et al. 2020). Conse-
quently, citizen science and community learning have gained prominence as tools
to help advance scientiﬁc research in sustainability. These forms of learning also
enhance public understanding and awareness of climate change and sustainability
challenges while fostering sustainability behaviours and competencies among citi-
zens(Cebriánetal.2020;Fritzetal.2019;Hsuetal.2014).Schoolclimateassemblies
outlined in this chapter are conceived as a form of citizen science and as a prac-
tical participatory sustainability research that engages school students and members
in sustainability learning and the co-creation of climate change and sustainability
solutions that are relevant to their local communities.
544
A. Boqué-Ciurana et al.
Engaging citizens and local communities actively in climate action and sustain-
ability provides unique learning opportunities and contributes to well-being, personal
fulﬁlment, and encouraging more sustainable lifestyles (Leicht et al. 2018). This
active involvement fosters full societal engagement, encourages creativity and inno-
vation, and instigates individual and collective behavioural shifts. It equips citizens
with better information, autonomy, and an active role in addressing social challenges
like climate change, sustainable development, and environmental protection. In turn,
active and community-based approaches can contribute to the achievement of the
green transformation outlined in the United Nations’ 2030 Agenda, the Spanish
Law on Climate Change and Energy Transition (Law 7/2021), the Spanish Strategy
for Decarbonization of the Economy, and the European Green Deal, to attain a
climate-neutral country and continent by 2050. Despite these endeavours, there
remains a limited understanding of the impact of participatory, transformative, and
community-based learning processes that involve diverse stakeholders in collab-
oration co-creating solutions to address climate change and current sustainability
challenges.
In terms of co-creation, Font Barnet et al. (2021) emphasized it as a dynamic,
innovative, and communal process rooted in collaboration among diverse stake-
holders. It aims to achieve consensus on a speciﬁc topic through a collective approach
conducted in focus group settings. The application of co-creation is versatile, span-
ning various economic sectors and serving different objectives. For instance, Vedeld
et al. (2019) utilized co-creation to enhance farmer engagement in weather and
climateservices. Hofstadet al. (2022) orchestratedcollaborativeurbanclimategover-
nance with insights from co-creation experiences in Copenhagen and Oslo. Ziervogel
et al. (2022) advocated for transformative climate adaptation through knowledge co-
creation in South Africa. In alignment with these principles, the conceptualization of
school climate assemblies in the EDUCLIMAD project emerges as a tangible mani-
festation of the commitment to quality education for sustainability and the promotion
of co-creation and participatory sustainability research and learning approaches. The
EDUCLIMAD project (TED2021-129854A-I00) “School Climate Assemblies: co-
creation of climate change mitigation and adaptation strategies and sustainability
competencies’ development”, is an applied research project funded by MICIU/AEI/
10.13039/501100011033 and by the European Union NextGenerationEU/ PRTR.
This project seeks to raise awareness and engage children and youngsters and their
educational communities in sustainability, through school climate assemblies in 25
Primary Schools in the region of Camp de Tarragona (Spain). It encourages innova-
tive democratic processes designed to learn, deliberate and make informed decisions
through climate assemblies, where students search for climate change solutions, and
propose actions to promote sustainability at local and regional levels. This innova-
tive initiative provides a practical sustainability research tool for developing sustain-
ability competencies and empowering the educational community in climate action
and sustainability transitions, which in turn aligns with the global efforts outlined in
the 2030 Agenda, reinforcing the transformative potential of education in creating a
more sustainable and just future.
Co-Creation and Participatory Research: Climate Assemblies …
545
In conclusion, individuals and communities must be empowered to actively partic-
ipate in sustainability research and transformative and community-based learning
processes to instigate novel lifestyles and socially responsible practices. These
processes, as advocated by Brundiers et al. (2021), aim to cultivate environmental
awareness and action while fostering the acquisition of fresh knowledge and skills
in sustainability. The potential of children and youth as catalysts for change within
their societies becomes evident in the rise of youth-led social movements centred on
sustainability and climate change (Biasutti 2015; Deisenrieder et al. 2020). Against
this backdrop, citizen science and community learning have recently become effec-
tive strategies. These approaches advance scientiﬁc research in sustainability and
enhance citizen understanding and awareness of climate change. Simultaneously,
they play a crucial role in nurturing new knowledge and skills in sustainability
(Cebrián et al. 2020; Fritz et al. 2019; Hsu et al. 2014).
This chapter presents a practical participatory sustainability research approach,
school climate assemblies, which allows connecting science with society and action,
and thus promotes sustainability learning and empowerment of school members and
stakeholdergroupstoco-createsustainabilityactionsthatareauthenticandrelevantto
their communities. We present the theoretical and methodological conceptualization
of school climate assemblies (Fig. 1), conceived as a transformative and community
learning process and as an innovative form of participatory sustainability research
that can contribute to the co-creation of climate change mitigation and adaptation
strategies within educational communities and the development of lifelong learning
sustainability competencies amongst students.
Fig. 1 Conceptual
foundations for the design of
school climate assemblies
Transformative 
learning
Participatory 
research
Community 
learning
Co-creation
546
A. Boqué-Ciurana et al.
2
Co-Creation and Participatory Sustainability Research
The EDUCLIMAD project is based on a Participatory Action Research (PAR)
approach grounded in social and community action, knowledge democratization,
equal participation, empowerment, social justice, and shared ownership. This
methodology provides active engagement opportunities and transforms sustainability
practices (Reason and Bradbury 2008). PAR addresses power dynamics, partic-
ipation, and decision-making (Kemmis and McTaggart 2005). Participatory and
action research are guided by methodological principles like integrating research
and action, collaborative partnerships, viewing participants as co-researchers and
co-learners, maintaining a high level of reﬂexivity, fostering transformative learning,
considering broader political and historical contexts, and starting from an aspira-
tion for social transformation and justice (Carr and Kemmis 2009; Somekh 2006).
PAR empowers all project participants to play active roles as co-researchers and
co-creators of knowledge throughout the design, implementation, and testing of
School Climate Assemblies. Community members and stakeholders engage in the
project and research process, ensuring actions resonate authentically with commu-
nity experiences and needs, considering diverse contexts and realities (Hergenrather
et al. 2009). Ultimately, PAR facilitates the integration of science with society and
aligns action with research, informing the design, implementation, and validation of
School Climate Assemblies through a collaborative and participatory sustainability
research approach with participants rather than merely on participants (Bradbury
Huang 2010).
Stakeholder groups, including primary education students, teachers, families, and
local community members, collaboratively formulate solutions and take actions
to address climate variability and change during School Climate Assemblies.
These efforts are supported by academic and non-academic experts and practi-
tioners specializing in education, climate change, and sustainability. The primary
objective is to enhance a real-world situation or problem—speciﬁcally, addressing
climate change and sustainability challenges in the EDUCLIMAD project. The co-
creation processes within School Climate Assemblies aim to yield evidence-based
research on the development of climate change mitigation and adaptation strate-
gies and sustainability competencies through the implementation of an intervention
sustainability research. Emphasizing reﬂection and action as central elements, the
learning-by-doing process takes precedence (Noffke 2009; Reason and Bradbury
2008).
The impact of School Climate Assemblies is assessed through empirical research
utilizing a mixed-methods approach. Experimental research methods evaluate behav-
ioral, social, and cultural changes, while qualitative inquiry methods, incorporating
participatory processes, provide in-depth insights into individual and collective
sustainability learning and competency development. EDUCLIMAD, an applied
sustainability research project, is designed to actively engage and empower indi-
viduals and communities to address climate change challenges within the Tarragona
Co-Creation and Participatory Research: Climate Assemblies …
547
region at both individual and collective levels. This aligns seamlessly with the imper-
ative for citizen engagement and social innovation, as emphasized in the Spanish Law
on Climate Change and Energy Transition and the EU Green Deal.
Engaging in participatory and action-oriented approaches is crucial for fostering
organizational learning and driving change toward sustainability in private and public
organizations (Doppelt 2010; Dunphy et al. 2007; Molnar and Mulvihill 2003).
Numerous publications have highlighted case studies demonstrating the successful
impact of action research and participatory research in promoting Education for
Sustainable Development (ESD) curriculum development, professional growth, and
organizational learning and change within schools and universities (Cebrián 2018;
Gayford 2003). This underscores the growing recognition within academic research
of the effectiveness of innovative, participatory, collaborative, and action-oriented
sustainability research approaches to explore sustainability and educational change
during the research process (Cebrián et al. 2013, 2015).
The fundamental learning processes integral to ESD promoted through school
climate assemblies and its participatory approach include dialogue and collabora-
tion, learning-by-doing, systems thinking, innovation, and active learning, which
align seamlessly with the principles of participatory and action research approaches
(Cebrián 2018; Tilbury 2011). Action research processes are deemed critical
for fostering the awareness, agency, and collaboration necessary to address the
challenges posed by sustainable development (Ballard 2005).
Utilizing the co-creation methodology proposed by Font Barnet et al. (2021),
our sustainability research approach integrates participatory action research and co-
creation to foster active engagement and shared decision-making. This combination
empowers participants in the school climate assemblies to collaboratively design and
implement adaptation and mitigation actions for pressing environmental concerns,
such as water, energy, tourism, and air quality, contributing to a more inclusive and
impactful process (Fig. 2).
3
School Climate Assemblies: Key Elements and Phases
In the past few years, there has been a notable increase in promoting citizen assem-
blies for climate, seen as progressive democratic mechanisms facilitating learning,
deliberation, informed decision-making, and exploring solutions to tackle climate
change while advancing local and regional sustainability. These assemblies actively
encourage citizen participation, exemplifying innovative approaches to enhance
democratic engagement in pursuing sustainable solutions (Stack and Griessler 2022).
The emergence of climate citizen assemblies underscores their efﬁcacy as inﬂuential
instruments for fostering a more inclusive and participatory democratic process in
the quest for innovative climate change and sustainability solutions, and a form of
citizen science and sustainability research. Citizen assemblies, comprising a diverse
group of individuals who convene to contemplate, discuss, and educate themselves
on a speciﬁc topic, aim to achieve consensus on actions and priorities (Grewin 2018).
548
A. Boqué-Ciurana et al.
Climate assemblies in schools
Environmental 
concerns
Co-creation
Participatory 
Action 
Research
Fig. 2 Elements constituting school climate assemblies
Employed in the United Kingdom (UK) and other nations like Australia, Canada, and
the United States, these assemblies have effectively addressed various intricate social
issues. In recent times, there has been a surge in the utilization of citizen assemblies
speciﬁcally focused on climate-related matters, serving as participatory processes
to enhance broader democratic engagement in seeking solutions to climate change,
driven by the insights of ordinary citizens (Capstick et al. 2020).
Across Europe, national citizen assemblies for climate have been organized in
countries such as Ireland (2016–2018), France (2019–2020), the UK (2020), Scot-
land (2020–2021), Denmark (2020–2021), Germany (2021), Finland (2021), and in
Austria and Spain in 2022 (Stack and Griessler 2022). France and the UK pioneered
the organization of climate citizen assemblies, aiming to amplify citizens’ voices and
involve a broad cross-section of the population in proposing measures and recom-
mendations for addressing climate change nationally (Climate Assembly UK 2020).
In 2021, the Spanish Government initiated its inaugural climate assembly, featuring
the participation of 100 citizens representing the diversity of Spanish society. The
Citizen Assembly for Climate is central in the Declaration on Climate and Environ-
mental Emergency in Spain, embedded in the Law on Climate Change and Energy
Transition. It signiﬁes a novel approach to fortify public participation by facili-
tating knowledge-sharing and identifying and discussing proposals to expedite urgent
responses to climate change.
Co-Creation and Participatory Research: Climate Assemblies …
549
Historically, climate assemblies are high-rank events, and have been predomi-
nantly organized by governments or municipalities. The EDUCLIMAD project seeks
to unlock the innovative possibilities inherent in this tool by tailoring and incorpo-
rating climate assemblies into the school environment documenting the learning
and outcomes derived from this participatory sustainability research process. Unlike
previous approaches, this process is orchestrated by schools and their communities,
taking a bottom-up approach. This contribution introduces the conceptualization of
school climate assemblies by drawing insights from past experiences conducted with
the general public. Stages in the implementation of school climate assemblies involve
the conceptualization of these assemblies as creative democratic procedures. They
aim to facilitate learning, deliberation, decision-making, and the pursuit of solu-
tions for climate variability and change, as well as local and regional sustainability.
Additionally, these stages include the assessment of their impact on environmental
awareness and the cultivation of sustainability competencies.
The progression of school climate assemblies involves a structured sequence
comprising three key stages: learning, deliberation, and decision-making. Facili-
tated by a team of experts, these stages are designed to ensure active participation
and the inclusion of all voices in the process. This approach is informed by the
works of Grewin (2018) and Ferejohn (2008). The typical phases incorporated into a
climateassemblyare:(1)Theinitiallearningstage,termedthelearningphase,encom-
passes preparatory materials and activities. It involves engaging climate change and
sustainability experts, who contribute through presentations, facilitated group discus-
sions, and expert panels or interactive conferences. Collectively, these elements offer
diverse perspectives on the subject matter; (2) The deliberation phase fosters dialogue
and discussion among participants, allowing them to share, co-create, and reﬁne their
perspectives and insights within the assembly. In this stage, experts play the role
of critical friends and facilitators. Various techniques are employed, such as open
plenary sessions, small group activities, active learning approaches, role-playing,
and workshops designed to envision different scenarios; (3) The decision-making
phase entails guiding participants in formulating collective and mutually agreed-
upon conclusions derived from their acquired knowledge, reﬂections, and discussions
during the assembly. The ultimate goal is to generate action plans accompanied by
policy recommendations.
The following diagram (Fig. 3) presents the key elements to consider in organizing
school climate assemblies in each of their three key phases:
The methods and strategies employed in school climate assemblies prioritize
participatory approaches. This involves utilizing tools such as participatory mapping,
envisioning alternative futures through visualization, incorporating artistic elements,
engaging in active learning, implementing role-playing exercises, and utilizing
problem trees (Shared Future 2020).
In the context of the EDUCLIMAD project, the school climate assemblies in the 5
and 6th grades of Primary Education commence with an initial phase involving prior
learning and inquiry on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) within schools.
Following this, the project orchestrates an inaugural session of the school climate
assembly. This session is overseen, facilitated, and guided by a team of university
550
A. Boqué-Ciurana et al.
• Creating a dynamic 
learning environment 
that fosters critical 
thinking
• Using varied 
learning formats
• Involving guest 
experts
• Providing 
preparatory 
educational materials 
for the assembly
LEARNING PHASE
• Inclusive, balanced, 
and thorough 
deliberations
• Establishing basic 
rules, structure, and 
clear frameworks for 
debate and discussion
DELIBERATION 
PHASE
• Voting and 
prioritizing actions 
and recommendations 
arising from the 
assembly
• Consensus-building 
through negotiation 
among groups can 
also be promoted.
DECISION-
MAKING PHASE
Fig. 3 Main phases of school climate assemblies
experts in climate change and sustainability. Each class group is invited to partici-
pate, along with members of the educational community, social and environmental
organizations, families, and teachers.
The inaugural session of the school climate assembly involves several differenti-
ated steps:
1. Learning and Reﬂection Phase: Conceptual maps are crafted within small
groups, highlighting various environmental topics. The objective is to pinpoint
perceived environmental challenges at neighbourhood, municipal, regional, or
provincial levels. Students also explore positive and negative aspects and brain-
storm potential opportunities or actions to address these challenges at individual,
school, neighbourhood, or municipal levels.
2. Deliberation Phase: This stage involves reaching a consensus on the ten priority
actions. The group collaboratively formulates a decalogue outlining these chosen
actions, subsequently sharing them with the entire group.
3. Voting and Individual Prioritization: Participants vote and individually priori-
tize the most signiﬁcant actions. This step aids in determining the actions deemed
most relevant by the assembly members.
Furthermore, in each school participating in the initiative a concluding feedback
session is organised. This session is dedicated to fostering agreements and a wider
consensus among the actions identiﬁed within different class groups. It also entails
assessing and merging the suggested actions and the achieved outcomes, comparing
them across the participating educational centres to subsequently produce a report
with the actions proposed and agreed in the climate assemblies and policy recom-
mendations to be shared with policy makers, the local community and other relevant
stakeholder groups.
The school climate assemblies, organised in Primary Education schools within
the framework of the EDUCLIMAD project offer a methodological approach that
Co-Creation and Participatory Research: Climate Assemblies …
551
directly contributes to providing tangible material for applying, developing, and
exploring the European sustainability competence framework GreenComp within
real educational settings. Recently published by the Joint Research Center (JRC) of
the European Commission (EC), the GreenComp framework (Bianchi et al. 2022)
serves as a competence framework for lifelong learning, emphasizing key sustain-
ability competencies. It includes 12 sustainability competencies across four areas:
embodyingsustainabilityvalues,embracingcomplexityinsustainability,envisioning
sustainable futures, and acting for sustainability. GreenComp is designed to enrich
education programs. Its purpose is to assist learners in cultivating knowledge, skills,
and attitudes that foster thoughtful, empathetic, responsible, and caring approaches
toward the planet and public health.
School climate assemblies emerge as an innovative participatory sustainability
research approach to be implemented within schools and educational communi-
ties, that can help operationalise the GreenComp framework, in which sustainability
competenciesaredeveloped,speciﬁcallythecompetencereferredtocollectiveaction.
This competence focuses on fostering collaborative efforts for change and encour-
aging learners to actively engage in democratic processes, thereby realizing more
sustainable societies.
4
Conclusions
School climate assemblies, a practical participatory sustainability research approach,
allow connecting science with society and action, promote sustainability learning and
empowerment of school members and stakeholder groups to co-create sustainability
actions that are authentic and relevant to their communities. In charting the course
for the EDUCLIMAD project, implementing school climate assemblies emerges
as a transformative endeavour that not only intersects society and primary educa-
tion schools with the academic landscape, but also resonates deeply with the urgent
need for climate action. This methodological approach represents a deliberate stride
towards integrating educational innovation, community engagement and learning,
and sustainability advocacy. By threading together, the complex fabric of local and
regional challenges posed by climate variability and change, this initiative aspires to
be more than a project milestone—it envisions itself as a catalyst for change, echoing
across the educational echelons and radiating into the broader landscape of societal
transformation. As we delve into the methodological intricacies of school climate
assemblies, the following conclusions distil the key insights and implications of this
innovative approach, pointing towards a future where education becomes a dynamic
force in shaping resilient and sustainable communities, and where students can expe-
rience and live sustainability in real world settings. The main conclusions that can
be drawn from the methodological conceptualisation of school climate assembles as
a participatory sustainability research approach are:
552
A. Boqué-Ciurana et al.
• By embracing the anticipated role of these assemblies as innovative educational
tools, the initiative aligns with and addresses through an applied research approach
both the social and scientiﬁc sustainability challenges articulated in signiﬁcant
policies such as the Spanish Law on Climate Change and Energy Transition, the
Spanish Decarbonization Strategy, and the European Green Deal.
• At its core, the implementation of school climate assemblies seeks to delve into
the co-creation and devising strategies and solutions for climate change mitiga-
tion and adaptation by actively engaging primary education students and local
communities in a participatory research process.
• School climate assemblies are conceptualized as bottom-up democratic proce-
dures designed to facilitate learning, deliberation, decision-making, and collabo-
rative problem-solving within the local and regional contexts affected by climate
variability and change.
• School climate assemblies contribute signiﬁcantly to the broader goal of realizing
the Sustainable Development Goals, emphasizing the active participation and
engagement of the school community.
• The methodology proposed fosters sustainability learning experiences and
embodies a community-oriented approach, positioning schools and educational
communities as key agents in driving meaningful climate action within their local
and regional environment.
• Beyond its immediate application, the innovative nature of school climate assem-
blies suggests scalability and adaptability to diverse contexts and educational
phases. This model can be a replicable and impactful strategy for addressing
climate challenges in other regions and countries.
This chapter provides a comprehensive insight into the conceptual and method-
ological sustainability research approach for implementing school climate assem-
blies in primary education schools. In essence, the implementation of school climate
assemblies emerges as a promising initiative, combining educational innovation,
community engagement and learning, and sustainability research for a shared, partic-
ipatory, comprehensive and impactful response to climate change. School climate
assemblies have the potential to foster sustainability learning and the development
of sustainability competences amongst participants, while promoting the co-creation
of climate change and sustainability solutions that are relevant to local communities.
References
Anderson C, Jacobson S (2018) Barriers to environmental education: How do teachers’ perceptions
in rural Ecuador ﬁt into a global analysis? Environ Educ Res 24(12):1684–1696. https://doi.org/
10.1080/13504622.2018.1477120
Ballard D (2005) Using learning processes to promote change for sustainable development. Action
Res 3(2):135–156. https://doi.org/10.1177/1476750305052138
Bradbury Huang H (2010) What is good action research? why the resurgent interest? Action Res
8(1):93–109. https://doi.org/10.1177/1476750310362435
Co-Creation and Participatory Research: Climate Assemblies …
553
Bianchi G, Pisiotis U, Cabrera Giraldez M (2022) GreenComp The European sustainability compe-
tence framework. In: Punie Y, Bacigalupo M (eds) EUR 30955 EN, Publications Ofﬁce of the
European Union, Luxembourg, 2022. ISBN 978-92-76-46485-3, https://doi.org/10.2760/13286,
JRC128040
Biasutti M (2015) An intensive programme on education for sustainable development: the partic-
ipants’ experience. Environ Educ Res 21(5):734–752. https://doi.org/10.1080/13504622.2014.
921805
Brundiers K, Barth M, Cebrián G, Cohen M, Diaz L, Doucette-Remington S, Dripps W, Habron
G, Harré N, Jarchow M, Losch K, Michel J, Mochizuki Y, Rieckmann M, Parnell R, Walker P,
Zint M (2021) Key competencies in sustainability in higher education—toward an agreed-upon
reference framework. Sustain Sci 16:13–29. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-020-00838-2
Bürgener L, Barth M (2018) Sustainability competencies in teacher education: making teacher
education count in everyday school practice. J Clean Prod 174:821–826. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jclepro.2017.10.263
Capstick S, Demski C, Cherry C, Verfuerth C, Steentjes K (2020) Climate change citizens’ assem-
blies. CAST Brieﬁng Paper 03. Centre for Climate Change and Social Transformations (CAST),
Bath
Carr W, Kemmis S (2009) Educational action research: a critical approach. In: Noffke S, Somekh
B (eds) The SAGE handbook of educational action research. SAGE Publications Ltd., London,
pp 74–84
Cebrián G (2018) The I3E model for embedding Education for Sustainability within higher educa-
tion institutions. Environ Educ Res 24(2):153–171. https://doi.org/10.1080/13504622.2016.121
7395
Cebrián G, Junyent M, Mulà I (2020) Competencies in education for sustainable development:
emerging teaching and research developments. Sustainability 12:579–587. https://doi.org/10.
3390/su12020579
Cebrián G, Junyent M (2015) Competencies in education for sustainable development: exploring
the student teachers’ views. Sustainability 7(3):2768–2786. https://doi.org/10.3390/su7032768
Cebrián G, Grace M, Humphris D (2013) Organisational learning towards sustainability in higher
education. Sustain Account Manag Policy J 4(3):285–306. https://doi.org/10.1108/SAMPJ-12-
2012-0043
Cebrián G, Grace M, Humphris D (2015) Academic staff engagement in education for sustainable
development. J Clean Prod 106:79–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.12.010
Climate Assembly UK (2020) The path to net zero. Climate Assembly UK. Full report. House of
Commons, United Kingdom
de Haan G (2006) The BLK ‘21’ programme in Germany: a ‘Gestaltungskompetenz’-based model
for education for sustainable development. Environ Educ Res 12(1):19–32. https://doi.org/10.
1080/13504620500526362
Deisenrieder V, Kubisch S, Keller L, Stötter J (2020) Bridging the action gap by democra-
tizing climate change education—the case of k.i.d.Z.21 in the context of fridays for future.
Sustainability 12:1748. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12051748
Doppelt B (2010) Leading change toward sustainability: a change-management guide for business,
government and civil society, 2nd edn. Greenleaf Publishing Limited, Shefﬁeld
Dunphy D, Grifﬁths A, Benn S (2007) Organizational change for corporate sustainability, 2nd edn.
Routledge, London
European Commission (2022) Council Recommendation of 16 June 2022 on learning for the green
transition and sustainable development. Accessed from https://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/
document/ST-9242-2022-INIT/en/pdf
Evans N, Whitehouse H, Gooch M (2012) Barriers, successes and enabling practices of education
for sustainability in far North Queensland schools: a case study. J Environ Educ 43(2):121–138.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00958964.2011.621995
Ferejohn J (2008) The Citizens’ assembly model. In: Warren ME, Pearce H (eds) Designing
deliberative democracy. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 192–213
554
A. Boqué-Ciurana et al.
Font Barnet A, Boqué-Ciurana A, Olano Pozo JX, Russo A, Coscarelli R, Antronico L, De Pascale
F, Saladié O, Anton-Clavé S, Aguilar E (2021) Climate services for tourism: an applied method-
ology for user engagement and co-creation in European destinations. Clim Serv 23:100249.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cliser.2021.100249
Fritz S, See L, Carlson T et al (2019) Citizen science and the United Nations sustainable development
goals. Nat Sustain 2(10):922–930. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-019-0390-3
Gayford C (2003) Participatory methods and reﬂective practice applied to research in education for
sustainability. Can J Environ Educ 8(1):129–142. https://cjee.lakeheadu.ca/article/view/242
Green M, Somerville M (2015) Sustainability education: researching practice in primary schools.
Environ Educ Res 21(6):832–845. https://doi.org/10.1080/13504622.2014.923382
Grewin M (2018) Citizens’ assemblies: guide to democracy that works. Open Plan Foundation,
Kraków
Hergenrather KC, Rhodes SD, Cowan CA, Bardhoshi G, Pula S (2009) Photovoice as community-
based participatory research: a qualitative review. Am J Health Behav 33(6):686–698. https://
doi.org/10.5993/ajhb.33.6.6
Hsu A, Malik O, Johnson L, Esty DC (2014) Development: mobilize citizens to track sustainability.
Nature 508:33–35. https://doi.org/10.1038/508033a
HofstadH,SørensenE,TorﬁngJ,VedeldT(2022)Designingandleadingcollaborativeurbanclimate
governance: comparative experiences of co-creation from Copenhagen and Oslo. Environ Policy
Gov 32(3):203–216. https://doi.org/10.1002/eet.1984
Jucker R, Mathar R (eds) (2015) Schooling for sustainable development in Europe: concepts, poli-
cies and educational experiences at the end of the UN decade of education for sustainable
development. Springer International Publishing, Cham
Kemmis S, McTaggart R (2005) Participatory action research: communicative action and the public
sphere. In: Denzin NK, Lincoln YS (eds) The SAGE handbook of qualitative research, 3rd edn.
Sage Publications Inc., Thousand Oaks, pp 559–603
Leicht A, Heiss J, Byun WJ (eds) (2018) Issues and trends in education for sustainable development.
UNESCO, Paris. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000261445
Lotz-Sisitka H, Wals AEJ, Kronlid D, McGarry D (2015) Transformative, transgressive social
learning: rethinking higher education pedagogy in times of systemic global dysfunction. Curr
Opin Environ Sustain 16:73–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2015.07.018
Molnar E, Mulvihill PR (2003) Sustainability-focused organizational learning: recent experiences
and new challenges. J Environ Planning Manag 46(2):167–176. https://doi.org/10.1080/096405
6032000070990
Mulà I, Cebrián G, Junyent M (2022) Lessons learned and future research directions in educating
for sustainability competencies. In: Vare P, Lausselet N, Rieckman M (eds) Competencies in
education for sustainable development: critical perspectives. Springer International Publishing,
Cham, pp 185–194
Noffke SE (2009) Revisiting the professional, personal and political dimensions of action research.
In: Noffke S, Somekh B (eds) The SAGE handbook of educational action research. SAGE
Publications Ltd., London, pp 6–24
Östman L, Van Poeck K, Öhman J (2019) Principles for sustainable development teaching. In: Van
Poeck K, Östman L, Öhman J (eds) Sustainable development teaching: ethical and political
challenges. Routledge, New York, pp 40–56
Reason P, Bradbury H (2008) Introduction. In: Reason P, Bradbury H (eds) The SAGE handbook of
action research: participative inquiry and practice, 2nd edn. SAGE Publications Ltd., London,
pp 1–10
Shared Future (2020) Climate Assemblies and Juries: a people powered response to the climate
emergency. Shared Future, Manchester
Shephard K, Harraway J, Lovelock B, Mirosa M, Skeaff S, Slooten L, Strack M, Furnari M,
Jowett T, Deaker L (2015) Seeking learning outcomes appropriate for ‘education for sustainable
development’ and for higher education. Assess Eval High Educ 40(6):855–866. https://doi.org/
10.1080/02602938.2015.1009871
Co-Creation and Participatory Research: Climate Assemblies …
555
Somekh B (2006) Action research: a methodology for change and development. Open University
Press, Buckingham
Stack S, Griessler E(2022). From a “half full or half empty glass” to “deﬁnitely a success”: explo-
rative comparison of impacts of climate assemblies in Ireland, France, Germany and Scotland
(IHS Working Paper, 39). Institut für Höhere Studien (IHS), Wien. https://nbn-resolving.org/
urn:nbn:de:0168-ssoar-78385-6
Symons G (2008) Practice, barriers and enablers in ESD and EE: A review of the research.
SEEd, Preston Montfort. Accessed from http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=
10.1.1.509.264&rep=rep1&type=pdf
Taylor N, Quinn F, Jenkins K, Miller-Brown H, Rizk N, Prodromou T, Serow P, Taylor S (2019)
Education for sustainability in the secondary sector—a review. J Educ Sustain Dev 13(1):102–
122. https://doi.org/10.1177/0973408219846675
Tilbury D (2011) Education for sustainable development: an expert review of processes and learning.
UNESCO, Paris. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0019/001914/191442e.pdf
UNESCO (2005) United Nations decade of education for sustainable development (2005–2014):
draft international implementation scheme. UNESCO, Paris. http://portal.unesco.org/education/
en/ﬁle_download.php/e13265d9b948898339314b001d91fd01draftFinal+IIS.pdf
UNESCO (2014) Shaping the future we want. DESD monitoring and evaluation UN Decade of
Education for Sustainable Development (2005–2014). Final report. UNESCO. UNESCO, Paris.
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000230171
UNESCO(2017)educationforsustainabledevelopmentgoals.learningobjectives.UNESCO,Paris.
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0024/002474/247444e.pdf
UNESCO (2020) Education for sustainable development: a roadmap. UNESCO, Paris. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.2048-416x.2009.tb00140.x
United Nations
(2012)
The
future
we
want:
outcome
document
adopted
at
Rio+20.
Accessed
from
http://www.uncsd2012.org/content/documents/727The%20Future%20We%
20Want%2019%20June%201230pm.pdf
United Nations (2015) Agenda for sustainable development. resolution adopted by the general
assembly on 25 September 2015 (A/70/L.1). Accessed from http://sustainabledevelopment.un.
org/post2015/transformingourworld
Vedeld T, Mathur M, Bharti N (2019) How can co-creation improve the engagement of farmers in
weather and climate services (WCS) in India. Clim Serv 15:100103. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cliser.2019.100103
Wals AEJ, Lenglet F (2016) Sustainability citizens: collaborative and disruptive social learning.
In: Horne R, Fien J, Beza BB, Nelson A (eds) Sustainability citizenship in cities: theory and
practice. Earthscan Publications, Oxford, pp 52–66
Wiek A, Withycombe L, Redman CL (2011) Key competencies in sustainability: a reference frame-
work for academic program development. Sustain Sci 6:203–218. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11
625-011-0132-6
Ziervogel G, Enqvist J, Metelerkamp L, van Breda J (2022) Supporting transformative climate
adaptation: community-level capacity building and knowledge co-creation in South Africa.
Clim Policy 22(5):607–622. https://doi.org/10.1080/14693062.2020.1863180
Role of Higher Education Institutions
in Promoting Sustainable Development
Goals Through Research, Teaching
and Outreach
Aline Bento Ambrosio Avelar
and María Luisa Pajuelo-Moreno
Abstract This book chapter explores the role of Higher Education Institutions
(HEIs) in promoting Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) through research,
teaching, and outreach. A Systematic Literature Review was conducted by data
collected from databases focusing on relevant peer-reviewed research papers
published between 2018 and October 2023. The study used both qualitative and
quantitative methods, including Descending Hierarchical Classiﬁcation (DHC) and
chi-square inferential statistics. Among the main results are that HEIs foster multidis-
ciplinary collaborations, employ novel research approaches, and facilitate knowledge
dissemination. They equip future professionals with the skills and competencies to
address the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and cultivate students who can
serve as catalysts for change. The chapter also addresses the integration of sustain-
ability principles into teaching practices and curricula, and their efforts to connect
with communities, legislators, and industry stakeholders through outreach activi-
ties. HEIs have the potential to signiﬁcantly impact society, the economy, and the
environment. However, there are gaps in the strategic approach and more research
is needed, especially in developing countries. HEIs can foster a society that values
sustainability, inclusivity, and collective well-being through outreach activities.
1
Introduction
The economic, social, and environmental considerations embedded in the formula-
tion of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) demand an inte-
grated and interconnected approach (García-Feijoo et al. 2020). These goals require
aninterdisciplinaryperspective, whereinall stakeholders—individuals, corporations,
A. B. A. Avelar (B)
University of São Caetano Do Sul, São Caetano Do Sul, São Paulo, Brazil
e-mail: aline.avelar@online.uscs.edu.br
M. L. Pajuelo-Moreno
United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
e-mail: ml.pajuelo@uaeu.ac.ae
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_31
557
558
A. B. A. Avelar and M. L. Pajuelo-Moreno
private and public entities, and governmental bodies—actively assume their respec-
tive responsibilities. In this context, the UN issued a special call for Higher Educa-
tion Institutions (HEIs) to actively promote and support the SDGs in education and
research (Annan-Diab and Molinari 2017).
However, it is important to note that the contributions of HEIs should not be
assessed solely in terms of scientiﬁc production and knowledge creation (Cottafava
et al. 2022), but rather beyond, as HEIs’ contributions should be considered in their
ability to address local grand challenges through collaboration, civic engagement,
and dissemination (Leal Filho et al. 2018). Recognition exists that sustainability in
higher education requires concerted action within the environment and society, with
a long-term and integrated vision based on the principles of human life and the world
in which we live (Leal Filho et al. 2019).
HEIs assume a pivotal role in the attainment of SDGs within society. However, for
their integration into HEIs, they are required to embrace an interdisciplinary approach
(Annan-Diab and Molinari 2017; Avelar et al. 2023) as well as a transdisciplinary
approach(Avelar andFarina2022). This involves advancingsustainabledevelopment
throughtheincorporationofSDGsacrossthethreeprimarymissionsofHEIs,namely,
education, research, and outreach (Avelar et al. 2019).
Therefore, it is expected that HEIs act as “change agents” (Bohunovsky et al.
2023). HEIs are called upon to assume a pivotal role in advancing these objec-
tives, given their signiﬁcance as inﬂuential contributors to the holistic development
of future citizens (Piza et al. 2018). Thus, HEIs have been globally recognized as
important stakeholders within the SDG framework (Leal Filho et al. 2019; Seraﬁni
et al. 2022), occupying a leadership position in guiding education, research, and soci-
etal outreach toward the sustainable development of people and societies (Cottafava
et al. 2022).
In response to this call and armed with the SDGs framework, an increasing
number of HEIs are internalizing SDGs into their strategic thinking, daily opera-
tions, and embracing sustainability as a core value (Cottafava et al. 2022). HEIs
are re-evaluating their teaching and research programs, and even the so-called third
mission (outreach) as part of their navigation toward sustainable development (Fia
et al. 2023). HEIs are taking a multi-faceted approach to align with the 2030 Agenda
and contribute to the SDGs. This includes strategic planning, curriculum develop-
ment, research, partnerships, community engagement, Global Vision, Active Peda-
gogy and Assessment and Training (Fuchs et al. 2023; Fia et al. 2023; Leal Filho
et al. 2023).
Due to the crucial role of HEIs, there has been a proliferation of research in recent
years on this integration with the aim of providing access to information, knowl-
edge, and the dissemination of best institutional practices by HEIs and organizations
(Franco et al. 2019; Alcántara-Rubio et al. 2022). It has been investigated not only
in relation to planning, pedagogy, curricula, and research but also in research on
institutional practices (Annan-Diab and Molinari 2017).
However,ashighlightedbyFiaetal.(2023)afterconductingasystematicliterature
review on the integration of SDGs in HEIs in research, teaching, outreach, and
managing operations, despite the growing literature on the activities that HEIs are
Role of Higher Education Institutions in Promoting Sustainable …
559
undertaking in this regard (Chankseliani and McCowan 2021), on the one hand, the
knowledge base revolves around an array of activities, and there have been only
attempts to synthesize these scholarly resources which makes the literature seem
fragmented. On the other hand, with some exceptions (Seraﬁni et al. 2022; Avelar
et al. 2023; Fia et al. 2023, among others), reviews of this topic have mostly focused
on a single university mission (e.g., teaching and not research) (Alonso-García et al.
2019; Weiss and Barth 2019), with very few focusing on all three missions.
To ﬁll this gap, the present study conducts a comprehensive literature review,
developing a methodology for classifying activities that can facilitate additional
knowledge growth (Fia et al. 2023). Speciﬁcally, we examine the role of HEIs in
advancing SDGs through research, teaching, and outreach. The primary focus is to
analyze existing literature on how the promotion of these missions intricately links
to the SDGs’ Agenda 2030. A systematic literature review will explore how HEIs’
can signiﬁcantly contribute to the SDGs through teaching, research, and outreach.
In this way, we classiﬁed 190 selected papers based on the type of university
activities considered (research, teaching, and outreach). Subsequently, we identiﬁed
the main gaps in the literature and discussed future avenues for addressing HEIs’
role in accomplishing SDGs.
The organizational framework of this chapter comprises ﬁve sections, with the
introductory segment (Sect. 1) articulating the signiﬁcance of conducting mapping
studies that speciﬁcally investigate the contributions of HEIs to the SDGs. Section 2
elucidates the theoretical framework by delineating three primary missions of
HEIs, namely teaching, research, and outreach. Section 3 outlines the methodology
employed for conducting the systematic literature review. Subsequently, Sect. 4
provides an in-depth analysis of the obtained results, while Sect. 5 encapsulates
the concluding remarks.
2
Theoretical Framework
Currently,challengesassociatedwithSDGsareaparamountconcernandsigniﬁcance
for HEIs (Fia et al. 2023; Leal Filho et al. 2023). HEIs have three key missions, which
interrelate and complement each other: teaching, research, and outreach (Avelar et al.
2022a). All these missions are intertwined with sustainable development, playing a
critical role in achieving SDGs (Leal Filho et al. 2019; Avelar and Farina 2022;
Seraﬁni et al. 2022). HEIs are now working to address various sustainability-related
challenges, which are linked to this institutions’ tripartite mission (Cottafava et al.
2022). To achieve effective integration, sustainability must be conveyed through
education, research, and outreach (Avelar et al. 2022b). In this context, HEIs must
walk the talk about SDGs across all these dimensions to achieve a true integration
(Fia et al. 2023).
Since we are going to determine how HEIs integrate the SDGs through teaching,
research, and outreach, we will proceed to brieﬂy deﬁne and highlight some of their
most relevant aspects.
560
A. B. A. Avelar and M. L. Pajuelo-Moreno
2.1
Teaching
Education encompasses curriculum, competencies, teaching methods, and the impli-
cations of the hidden curriculum (Hueske and Pontoppidan 2020, p. 99). Concerns
in teaching include how disciplines are formed, reviewed, and how sustainability is
integrated into curricula through multidisciplinary involvement and interdisciplinary
guidance (Annan-Diab and Molinari 2017; Avelar et al. 2022a, b).
As highlighted by Avelar et al. (2023), within the framework of SDG 4, dedicated
to education, SDG Target 4.7 aims to ensure, by 2030, that all learners acquire
the knowledge and skills essential for promoting sustainable development. This
includes, among other aspects, education for sustainable development (ESD) and
sustainable lifestyles (UN 2015, p. 17). Recognizing that ESD serves as a pivotal
instrument in achieving the SDGs, UNESCO deﬁnes ESD as empowering learners
to make informed decisions and take responsible actions for environmental integrity,
economic viability, and a just society for present and future generations (UNESCO
2017, p. 7).
Therefore, it is imperative for future decision-makers to comprehend the
impending challenges of sustainability (Dyllick 2015). Consequently, ESD directs
individuals to reﬂect on knowledge management and understand the effects and
complexity of behaviors (García-Feijoo et al. 2020).
According to Piza et al. (2018), HEIs play a critical role in preparing future
decision-makers by providing information that contributes to the skills and compe-
tencies necessary to address sustainability challenges in increasingly complex and
global contexts. For them, sustainable HEIs are deﬁned as educational institutions
that offer a clear perspective on how students, professors and administrators can
contribute to sustainability (Piza et al. 2018). HEIs promote the SDGs through
teaching by embedding sustainability into their educational offerings, developing
leadership skills among students, and engaging in partnerships that enhance the
practical application of sustainability principles (Hauser and Ryan 2021; Son-Turan
2021; Obrecht et al. 2022).
To achieve this, higher education institutions (HEIs) must shift their paradigm and
curriculum towards sustainability, transitioning from the economic paradigm to the
humanistic paradigm (Avelar et al. 2023). This entails incorporating the theoretical
foundations of sustainability into courses, fostering critical thinking and decision-
making, and providing opportunities for students to engage with and connect to the
real world (García-Feijoo et al. 2020).
HEIs through the efforts of their educators and institutional initiatives, possess
the capacity to raise students’ awareness regarding the imperative of contributing to
sustainable development (Dyllick 2015). This involves broadening students’ knowl-
edge base and actively involving them in discussions related to sustainability and
SDGs (Leal Filho et al. 2019). Educators, given their inﬂuential positions and exten-
sive reach, wield the potential to serve as catalysts for change. Leveraging their
expertise, skills, and perspectives, educators can actively contribute to transforming
students’ attitudes and behaviors concerning sustainability, with the expectation that
this transformative process will be evident in students’ actions (Avelar et al. 2022a,
b).
Role of Higher Education Institutions in Promoting Sustainable …
561
2.2
Research
The 17 SDGs comprise themes that are aligned with education, research and outreach
(Wersun 2017). Leal Filho et al. (2018) point out that HEIs and their staff should try
to take more advantage of the many opportunities that the SDGs offer, not only with
regard to teaching and research, but especially with regard to their outreach activities
(the so-called “3rd mission”) and act as public defenders in support of the SDGs.
Universities should be ahead of the package, not behind it (p. 294).
HEIs are promoting the SDGs through research by engaging in interdisciplinary
approaches, focusing on problem-solving for societal needs, and aligning their
research specializations with the goals most relevant to their institutional proﬁles
(Pietrzak 2022).
However, while SDGs have inﬂuenced the traditional curricula of HEIs in recent
years, the research motivations and personal attitudes of scholars remain subjects
of individual interactions and are still under investigation (Cottafava et al. 2022).
HEIs´managers can support and guide these interactions through interdisciplinary
approaches, policies and organizational strategies, such as research groups, research
centers, and dedicated budgets (Sonetti et al. 2019). This approach would enable
them to engage the most adept researchers with theoretical knowledge in the service
of public policy, thereby promoting impact or academic engagement (Cottafava
et al. 2022). Furthermore, HEIs can encourage researchers to bridge and synthe-
size various perspectives, thereby cultivating a holistic and systemic approach to
addressing challenges posed by SDGs (Secundo et al. 2020).
The potential of SDGs to mobilize and sustain interest within a HEI necessi-
tates the integration of education, sustainable development, and human development
(Agbedahin 2019). As underscored by Cottafava et al. (2022), if an HEI’s commit-
ment to SDGs is genuine and the organization undergoes transformation, local poli-
cymakers may enhance their decision-making processes regarding local sustainable
development issues by leveraging the expertise of the university’s highly skilled
researchers and up-to-date scientiﬁc knowledge for local interventions (Miotto et al.
2020). Moving beyond the campus, HEIs are poised to become pivotal actors driving
the transition towards sustainability and SDGs (Körfgen et al. 2018; Seraﬁni et al.
2022).
2.3
Outreach
As previously outlined, the UN attributes to HEIs a critical role, especially by
preparing future professionals and leaders and disseminating the wide-ranging
aspects of sustainability (Findler et al. 2019). Leal Filho et al. (2021) emphasize that
another form of contributing to positive change towards sustainability is community
outreach(Berchinetal.2019),i.e.,initiativesbyuniversitiestoengagemutuallybene-
ﬁcially with communities in their regions. Thus, beyond what is known as the “third
562
A. B. A. Avelar and M. L. Pajuelo-Moreno
mission,” sustainability transformations may be supported through cross-sector part-
nerships with diverse local actors in a speciﬁc location, region, or societal sub-sector
(Leal Filho et al. 2021).
So, HEIs, as leaders in education, research, and innovation, play a key role in
social change and promoting SDGs (Blasco et al. 2020). Therefore, HEIs are increas-
ingly cooperating with the community, providing societal impact (Medved and Ursic
2021). The relationship between HEIs and communities can take various forms and
encompasses the different activities of universities, such as research, teaching, and
outreach (Plummer et al. 2022, p. 2), including active partnership activities related
to the operations within the institutional structure of HEIs.
HEIs are increasingly recognizing their role as agents of change and are working
on outreach in various ways. They are seen as key players in introducing and imple-
menting sustainability in a holistic manner, connecting people and including social
and institutional considerations (Longoria et al. 2021). This involves strategies and
tools to promote SDGs among all community members, as their participation is
crucial in deﬁning the full process of research or project development, targeting,
facilitating, and supervising sustainable transformations (Useh 2021).
Therefore, under their capacity as agents of change, HEIs exhibit a public aware-
ness and civic commitment to generating positive impacts in real-life problems and
situations(LealFilhoetal.2021).Thisroleiscrucialatboththelocallevel,generating
positive impacts in their local communities (e.g., Vickers et al. 2017; Unangst and
Crea 2020; Finatto et al. 2023), who analyze the impact of HEIs in addressing refugee
issues), as well as in guiding national and international policies and contributing to
global initiatives like the Agenda 2030 or the SDGs (e.g., Avelar et al. 2022a, b, or
Leal Filho et al. 2021, focusing on the 17 SDGs, or Lange Salvia et al. 2020, focusing
on the energy goal).
However, integrating sustainability and SDGs in all dimensions of HEIs (educa-
tion, research, and outreach) requires a strong sustainable management agenda (Kolb
and Kolb 2017), where both teachers and HEIs need to consider the inﬂuence of the
SDGs in deliberations on incorporating sustainability in these HEIs comprehensively
and interdisciplinarity (Annan-Diab and Molinari 2017), both internally and exter-
nally with reference to activities and programs of action within society (Hueske and
Pontoppidan 2020). In this context, outreach activities come into play, which must
entail collaboration with society (Muff et al. 2017). For this, HEIs must establish
continuous dialogue with their stakeholders (Haertle et al. 2017), promoting innova-
tive pedagogies, outreach projects, and partnerships with them, seeking to increase
entrepreneurship related to SDGs, with a focus on sustainable gains for society rather
than personal and business gains (Avelar et al. 2022a, b).
Outreach on sustainability can be described as universities’ actions “to engage
withthecommunitiesintheirsurroundingsinamutuallybeneﬁcialprocessofsustain-
able development” (Berchin et al. 2019, p. 1), promoting sustainable, inclusive, and
participatory planning (Castro Pena et al. 2017) and providing social engagement
(Mora et al. 2018) and volunteerism (Shiel et al. 2016). Although outreach is not one
of the most discussed roles of universities towards sustainability, these institutions
Role of Higher Education Institutions in Promoting Sustainable …
563
need to acknowledge their mission to contribute to democratic processes within their
campuses and also throughout society (Andrade et al. 2018).
Thus, the implementation of the SDGs through outreach is aligned with sustain-
able management education and includes working with other HEIs, various govern-
ment and business entities, as well as the broader local community, on matters
pertaining to sustainable development (Hueske and Pontoppidan 2020, p. 97),
highlighting the inﬂuence and contribution of universities to society, especially
by preparing future professionals and leaders and disseminating the wide-ranging
aspects of sustainability (Findler et al. 2019).
However, except for papers that speciﬁcally examine the outreach mission, there
is a limited number of papers focusing on it. Seraﬁna et al. (2022) arrived at this
conclusion after conducting a literature review, highlighting that only a small number
of studies analyze the alignment of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) with
outreach projects of Higher Education Institutions (HEIs), and there is a need for
further research in this area. Therefore, it is necessary to delve deeper into the study
of the outreach mission of HEIs, as we will do in this study.
3
Methodology
We conducted a Systematic Literature Review (SLR) to examine the role of HEIs in
promoting SDGs through research, teaching and outreach. SLR allows researchers
to analyze problems in an organized and systematic manner, thus improving the
quality of research results (Jesson et al. 2011). SLR helps researchers identify key
evidence relevant to research questions and ensures transparency (Walker 2010).
This method is considered appropriate in management and allows the researcher to
conduct a comprehensive study by examining a large amount of literature without
partial selection (Booth et al. 2016).
3.1
Data Collection, Review Process and Inclusion Criteria
For data collection, we used the database Scopus and Web of Science to discern rele-
vant patterns in articles appropriate to our research objectives (Jesson et al. 2011). We
chose those databases due to their reliable indexing (Stahlschmidt and Stephen 2020).
We identiﬁed relevant peer-reviewed research papers published in English between
2018 and October 2023, given that 5 years is sufﬁcient to review the publications and
acquire relevant knowledge (Booth et al. 2016). Limit the search to peer-reviewed
articles considered to be of higher quality than other contributions (Jesson et al.
2011). We also focused on the areas of economics, business, management, social
sciences, and education and educational research to ﬁnd articles more relevant to our
focus on Promoting SDG through research, teaching and outreach.
564
A. B. A. Avelar and M. L. Pajuelo-Moreno
We considered the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews
and Meta-analyses) approach: a script designed to improve the quality of systematic
reviews by considering a checklist of multiple validation elements. This method
ﬁrst uses a combination of keywords. The PRISMA statement, published in 2009,
aims to help authors of systematic reviews transparently document the justiﬁcation
of their reviews. This approach aims to improve the quality of systematic reviews
through the use of checklist items. In general, PRISMA performs four important
steps: searching using keywords and appropriate databases, ﬁltering for inclusive
and exclusive features, synthesis by classifying the data, and ﬁnally analysis of the
data that can explain the results of the article (Page et al. 2021).
Then, speciﬁc criteria are applied for (i) identiﬁcation: 181 in Scopus and 171 Web
of Science; (ii) screening: duplicated studies were removed from comparison of the
bases; (iii) eligibility: assessed the articles by carefully sifting through the abstracts,
main content, practices, and outcomes. Finally, 190 articles were considered for
further analysis. After separating the texts, they were imported into the software
Iramuteq 0.7 Alpha 2 (Interface of R for multidimensional analyses of texts and
questionnaires), used for the treatment of qualitative data.
Analyzes were performed using IRAMUTEQ software and both qualitative
and quantitative methods were used. Qualitative methods examine words used in
published papers, while quantitative methods examine the frequency of words and
use chi-square inferential statistics. Descending Hierarchical Classiﬁcation (DHC)
for analyzing the content of text corpora (Reinert 1990). DHC examines text frag-
ments, classiﬁes them according to their respective vocabulary, and presents their
variants as a set of text to be analyzed, thus grouping statistically signiﬁcant words.
The DHC technique uses the method of Reinert (1990), which classiﬁes small text
fragments composed of speciﬁc words whose corresponding attributes are derived
from the respondent’s speech and is obtained from the entire corpus without a priori
information. extracted. Likewise, Reinert’s algorithm segments text into Elementary
Context Units (ECUs) of roughly similar length; these include phrases or phrase
fragments separated by punctuation. The occurrences and co-occurrences of words in
each unit are then examined and the results are formed into a matrix. The occurrence
and co-occurrence of words is the basis for assessing the similarity between the
text segments that constitute their grouping (Retinaud and Marchand 2012). Each
published paper is called an Initial Context Unit (ICU). The text segments that make
up each category are called ECUs and are obtained from the ICU. Each controller is
characterized by a vocabulary that is similar within its class but different from other
classes.
The analysis performed by this software is both qualitative (because it analyzes
words) and quantitative (because it calculates frequencies and performs chi-square
tests). The chi-square value estimates the importance of the association between a
word and the vocabulary used in a speciﬁc part of the text (a chi-square value of 3.84
corresponds to a random probability of association of 0.05%). Often, meaning is
related to the presence of words in a speciﬁc part. However, a form that is frequently
associated with a particular word is rarely associated with the part in which it is
Role of Higher Education Institutions in Promoting Sustainable …
565
least frequently used, even if it occurs more frequently in other parts (Retinaud and
Marchand 2012).
4
Analysis of Results
This subsection presents general information about the 190 studies through analysis
and systematic overview, the characteristics of scientiﬁc production help to determine
how to approach the topic from a temporal perspective. Considering the trends over
time (Table 1), in 2023, the number of HEI publications promoting the SDGs through
research, teaching and promotion increased, with a total of 58 articles published. This
trend in the number of publications has only recently increased, with a sharp increase
in the number of publications from 2018 to 2023.
Regarding journals, International Journal of Sustainability in Higher Education
(21.05%) and Sustainability (17.37%) emerge as the foremost publications, distinctly
surpassing others in the dissemination of articles pertaining to the subject under
examination.
The preponderance of paper authors shares a common country of origin (66.29%),
whereas papers authored by individuals from multiple countries are less scarce
(33.71%), underscoring the imperative to foster international collaboration. More-
over, although many of these works are authored by a single author (11.05%), the
majority of them are conducted collaboratively among multiple authors, primarily
three (21.58%), two (18.95%), four (16.84%), and ﬁve (10.53%), with the remainder
being carried out by numerous authors ranging from six to even fourteen authors
from various countries.
Concerning the countries and regions analyzed, a majority of papers are focused
on a singular country (67.24%), with a minority concurrently investigating multiple
countries (36.76%). While prevailing literature often concentrates on developed
countries, our study reveals a slight prevalence of analyses in developing countries
(39.53% compared to 37.21% in developed countries). A substantial percentage of
studies considers both development levels and conducts comparisons between them
(23.26%). Regarding regions, Europe stands out as the most studied region (33.33%),
Table 1 Number of
publications from 2018 to
2023
Year
Research papers published
2023
58
2022
56
2021
42
2020
17
2019
12
2018
5
566
A. B. A. Avelar and M. L. Pajuelo-Moreno
followed by Asia (14.12%), Latin America (10.73%), and Africa (10.17%), with
numerous studies conducted at a global level (18.08%).
In terms of methodology, a predominant share of papers employs cross-sectional
approaches (65.70%), with a smaller proportion utilizing longitudinal studies
(31.98%) and a minimal number employing mixed methods approaches (2.33%).
Moreover, a signiﬁcant portion of the studies adopts a qualitative methodology
(43.53%), while a smaller proportion employs a quantitative approach (30%), and
some integrate both methodologies in a complementary manner (26.47%). In the case
of quantitative studies, univariate methodologies are predominantly used, featuring
exploratory and descriptive studies, with limited use of multivariate approaches
(18.24%), primarily regression or PLS-SEM. Lastly, it is noteworthy that the primary
data source is surveys in the majority of papers (56.18%), with minimal reliance on
Higher Education Institutions’ reports for analysis (2.81%).
In Table 2, we have compiled the most cited research papers on Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) across the domains of research, teaching, and outreach.
Leal Filho et al. (2019, 2021) focus on integrating the SDGs into higher education
institutions. Therefore, they emphasize the importance of integrating the SDGs into
university curricula and emphasize the need for a framework or model that facilitates
this integration. Vega Avila et al. (2019), Leal Filho et al. (2019) highlighted the
challenges universities face in promoting sustainability, citing barriers such as lack of
planning, limited resources and resistance to change. The focus is on the challenges
faced by institutional academics and staff without delving into the structural and
institutional challenges that prevent universities from effectively implementing the
SDGs.
Alexo et al. (2021), Leal Filho et al. (2019) recognized the importance of student
awareness and engagement in promoting university sustainability and highlighted
that they will be the most important inﬂuencing factors in the future. Franco et al.
(2019),LealFilhoetal.(2019)focusontheneedforastrategicapproachtointegrating
the SDGs into higher education and highlight existing gaps that need to be addressed
to achieve more effective integration.
Lazzarini et al. (2018), Aleixo et al. (2021) conducted an in-depth study of
the performance and engagement of academics and students committed to main-
taining stability, whose papers were suspended for promoting cultural change without
engaging in maintaining stability. Vega Avila et al. (2019), Zamora-Polo et al. (2019)
identiﬁed barriers to innovation and sustainability in higher education that arise
following a disconnect and understanding of SDGs among students and higher educa-
tion professionals. These articles identify barriers to innovation and sustainability
but do not provide in-depth analysis of the causes of these barriers, such as lack
of institutional support, bureaucratic structures, or even systemic issues in higher
education.
The importance of integrating the SDGs into academic curricula across disci-
plines and sectors is underappreciated, highlighting the need for a more holistic and
interconnected approach to sustainability. Our most cited academics have conducted
extensive research on HEI papers without SDGs. Overall, these works provide a
Role of Higher Education Institutions in Promoting Sustainable …
567
Table 2 Most-cited research papers on SDG through research, teaching and outreach
Research papers
published title
Authors
Journals
Year
Number of citations
Scopus
Web of
science
Sustainable
Development Goals
and sustainability
teaching at
universities: Falling
behind or getting
ahead of the pack?
Leal Filho, W., Shiel,
C., Paço, A., …Vargas,
V. R., Caeiro, S
Journal of
Cleaner
Production
2019
271
223
Higher education for
sustainable
development:
actioning the global
goals in policy,
curriculum and
practice
Franco, I., Saito,
O., Vaughter,
P., …Kanie,
N., Takemoto, K
Sustainability
Science
2019
117
96
What do university
students know about
sustainable
development goals?
A realistic approach
to the reception of
this UN program
amongst the youth
population
Zamora-Polo,
F., Sánchez-Martín,
J., Corrales-Serrano,
M., Espejo-Antúnez, L
Sustainability
(Switzerland)
2019
101
90
Planning and
implementing
sustainability in
higher education
institutions: an
overview of the
difﬁculties and
potentials
Leal Filho, W., Pallant,
E., Enete, A., Richter,
B., Brandli, L.L
International
Journal of
Sustainable
Development
and World
Ecology
2018
77
59
Education for
advancing the
implementation of
the Sustainable
Development Goals:
A systematic
approach
Avelar, A. B.
A., Silva-Oliveira, K.
D. D., Pereira, R. D. S
International
Journal of
Management
Education
2019
73
64
Barriers to
innovation and
sustainability in
universities: an
international
comparison
Veiga Ávila,
L., Beuron, T.
A., Brandli, L.
L., …Pereira, R.
S., Klein, L. L
International
Journal of
Sustainability
in Higher
Education
2019
59
43
(continued)
568
A. B. A. Avelar and M. L. Pajuelo-Moreno
Table 2 (continued)
Research papers
published title
Authors
Journals
Year
Number of citations
Scopus
Web of
science
A framework for the
implementation of
the Sustainable
Development Goals
in university
programmes
Leal Filho,
W., Frankenberger,
F., Salvia, A.
L., …Mifsud,
M., Ávila, L. V
Journal of
Cleaner
Production
2021
55
41
Higher education
students’ perceptions
of sustainable
development in
Portugal
Aleixo, A. M., Leal,
S., Azeiteiro, U. M
Journal of
Cleaner
Production
2021
42
33
Key characteristics
of academics
promoting
Sustainable Human
Development within
engineering studies
Lazzarini,
B., Pérez-Foguet,
A., Boni, A
Journal of
Cleaner
Production
2018
42
35
Sustainable
leadership in higher
education
institutions: social
innovation as a
mechanism
Iqbal, Q.,
Piwowar-Sulej, K
International
Journal of
Sustainability
in Higher
Education
2022
33
30
solid foundation for future questions and are recommended by practitioners and
policymakers committed to maintaining greater stability in life.
4.1
Descending Hierarchical Classiﬁcation (DHC) of Role
of Higher Education Institutions in Promoting
Sustainable Development Goals Through Research,
Teaching and Outreach
For a deeper understanding of the classiﬁcation and thematic analysis, content anal-
ysis techniques were used. This required a careful review of the title, abstract,
and keywords. This process was facilitated by Iramuteq 0.7 Alpha 2 software,
which is designed for processing qualitative data. By using Descending Hierarchical
Classiﬁcation (DHC), we strive to group words and understand their hierarchical
relationships, generating statistical results that require theoretical interpretation by
researchers.
Role of Higher Education Institutions in Promoting Sustainable …
569
Qualitative methods examine language use in discourse, whereas quantita-
tive methods focus on word frequency and apply chi-square inferential statistical
methods. DHC analyses are used to examine the textual corpus. In particular,
DHC classiﬁes text fragments according to their respective vocabulary, allowing
the identiﬁcation of statistically signiﬁcant word clusters.
The DHC technique is based on Reinert’s (1990) method of segmenting text into
elementary context units (ECUs) and examining the occurrence and co-occurrence of
words within each unit. This process creates a matrix that helps identify meaningful
patterns in the analyzed content.
To understand the approaches/lenses that involve research on role of HEI in
Promoting SDG through research, teaching and outreach, Iramuteq software was
used, which allowed content analysis to be performed to identify different themes
and approaches.
A combination of the title, the keywords, and the summary of the articles was used
for this analysis. A thorough inspection of the results allowed us to group the various
themes into four dominant lenses (classes), namely: (i) Class 1 (28,2%) Outreach;
(ii) Class 2 (21%) Research; (iii) Class 3 (28,7,4%) HEI; and (iv) Class 4 (22,1%)
Teaching (Fig. 1). These lenses provide a framework that helps in evaluating and
understanding the literature on HEI in Promoting SDG.
Class 1 (28,2%) represents approaches to implementation on HEIs play a critical
role in society by engaging in outreach activities that are designed to ensure sustain-
able and inclusive development. These institutions are pivotal in driving change and
addressing complex global challenges, such as gender inequality, poverty, and the
Fig. 1 Representation of themes and lenses
570
A. B. A. Avelar and M. L. Pajuelo-Moreno
impacts of COVID-19. By aligning their efforts with the United Nations Sustain-
able Development Goals (SDGs), HEIs contribute to the creation of a more equi-
table world for current and future generations, while also focusing on human capital
development within their local and global communities (Useh 2021).
Outreach programs are essential in fostering a sustainable society by promoting
inclusive education and research that not only addresses immediate societal needs
but also anticipates future challenges. Through these programs, HEIs play a transfor-
mative role by integrating sustainability into their curricula, research, and commu-
nity engagement efforts. This approach helps to ensure that the next generation is
equipped with the knowledge and skills necessary to tackle complex issues such as
climate change, poverty, and health disparities (Longoria et al. 2021).
Moreover, the role of HEIs in outreach is crucial in the aftermath of the COVID-
19 pandemic. Useh (2021) emphasizes the pandemic has highlighted the need for
resilient and adaptable education systems that can respond to global crises. HEIs
have the opportunity to play a leading role in rebuilding communities and ensuring
that recovery efforts are aligned with sustainable and inclusive principles, thereby
contributing to the reduction of poverty and the promotion of gender equality.
Class 2 (28,2%) represents approaches HEIs are increasingly aligning their
research activities with the SDGs to contribute to global sustainability efforts. This
alignment is evident in the growing number of publications on sustainability and
higher education, which often feature a variety of keywords related to sustain-
able development (Bautista-Puig et al. 2022). HEIs contribute to the SDGs through
interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary research that addresses societal problems and
focuses on local development (Monteiro et al. 2023). This research is often guided
by the need to solve real-world issues and is characterized by its relevance to the
various themes encompassed by the SDGs.
The research activities of HEIs are structured around four main axes: governance
and campus operations, learning and teaching, research, and community engagement
(Monteiro et al. 2023). These axes reﬂect the comprehensive approach that HEIs are
taking to integrate SDGs into their core functions. By focusing on these areas, HEIs
can ensure that their research not only advances academic knowledge but also has
practical implications for sustainable development.
Moreover, the research conducted by HEIs is becoming increasingly specialized,
with different types of HEIs focusing on different SDGs based on their academic
proﬁle. For instance, a study on Polish public HEIs revealed that HEI of life sciences
had the highest publication productivity for SDGs related to environmental and life
sciences, while HEI of technology and economics focused on SDGs related to their
respective ﬁelds (Pietrzak 2022). This specialization indicates that HEIs are lever-
aging their unique strengths and expertise to contribute to the SDGs in targeted and
impactful ways.
In the context of research conducted by HEIs to promote SDGs, various method-
ologies and approaches are employed, which often include the use of question-
naires, analysis, interviews, and surveys. These tools are essential for collecting data
and gaining insights into the effectiveness of initiatives and the progress towards
achieving the SDGs (Table 3).
Role of Higher Education Institutions in Promoting Sustainable …
571
Table 3 Context of research conducted by HEIs to promote SDGs
Tools
Context of research
Authors
Questionnaire
HEIs may use questionnaires to gather information
from respondents about their awareness, attitudes,
and behaviors related to sustainability practices on
campus or in the broader community
Monteiro et al. (2023)
Analysis
The data collected through various means, such as
surveys or interviews, are subjected to analysis to
identify patterns, trends, and correlations that can
inform strategies for promoting SDGs
González-Torre and
Suárez-Serrano (2022)
Interview
Interviews, including semi-structured interviews,
are qualitative research methods that allow
researchers to collect in-depth information from
participants, providing rich insights into their
experiences and perspectives on sustainability
Bautista-Puig et al.
(2022)
Datum (Data)
Data is the plural of datum and refers to the
individual pieces of information collected during
research, which are then analyzed to draw
conclusions about the research questions
Pietrzak (2022)
Survey
Surveys are a common method for collecting
quantitative data from a large sample of
respondents, which can be used to assess the
impact of HEIs on SDGs
Qualitative
Qualitative research methods, such as interviews
and content analysis, are used to explore complex
issues in depth and understand the context and
meaning behind the data collected
Bautista-Puig et al.
(2022)
Publication
The results of research on SDGs are often
disseminated through publications, which
contribute to the academic discourse and share
ﬁndings with a wider audience
Dreval et al. (2022)
Sample
The sample refers to the subset of the population
selected for participation in a study, and it is crucial
for the validity and generalizability of the research
ﬁndings
Pietrzak (2022)
Conduct
HEIs conduct research by designing and
implementing studies that address various aspects
of the SDGs, using appropriate methodologies to
collect and analyze data
Dreval et al. (2022)
Quantitative
Quantitative research methods involve the
collection and analysis of numerical data, which
can be used to measure the impact of HEIs on
SDGs and track progress over time
González-Torre and
Suárez-Serrano (2022)
Collect
The process of gathering data, whether through
surveys, interviews, or other means, is a
fundamental step in conducting research related to
SDGs
Pietrzak (2022)
572
A. B. A. Avelar and M. L. Pajuelo-Moreno
Class 3 (28,2%) represents how HEIs access, analyze, and propose strategies to
better align themselves with the 2030 Agenda and make substantial contributions
towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.
HEIs are increasingly recognized as pivotal actors in the global effort to achieve
the SDGs outlined in the 2030 Agenda. To better align themselves with these goals
and make substantial contributions, HEIs are adopting a variety of strategies and
approaches. Firstly, HEIs are integrating the SDGs into their strategic planning
processes. This involves considering the SDGs at the time of HEI strategy formula-
tion, design, and implementation of processes and practices (Leal Filho et al. 2023).
By doing so, HEIs can ensure that their educational, research, and societal missions
are aligned with the objectives of sustainable development.
Secondly, HEIs are assessing and revising their curricula to incorporate sustain-
ability principles and the SDGs. This is crucial for training professionals who are
committed to sustainability and can address related challenges and opportunities
(Fuchs et al. 2023). The curricula are being reviewed, discussed, and amended to
reﬂect the SDGs, often with a transdisciplinary approach that promotes integrated
and transformative practices beyond the classroom and across disciplines (Fuchs
et al. 2023).
Thirdly, HEIs are engaging in research that supports the SDGs. They are providing
expertise in research and education on all sectors of the SDGs, which is essential
for cross-sectoral implementation (Leal Filho et al. 2023). This research is not only
focused on environmental aspects but also on a systemic perspective that includes
education, campus operations, outreach, and assessment and reporting (Fia et al.
2023).
Fourthly, HEIs are fostering partnerships with governments, communities, and
other stakeholders. These collaborations are necessary to identify priorities, deter-
mine feasible options, and assess the measures implemented to achieve the SDGs
(Leal Filho et al. 2023). By working with policymakers and other actors, universi-
ties can use their expertise and skills to inﬂuence the adoption of more sustainable
policies and practices.
Fifthly, HEIs are investing in outreach programs to involve students in their local
communities. These interventions ensure efforts from all stakeholders and enhance
their beneﬁts, contributing to the public projection of unsustainable practices and
mobilizing students for social intervention through new ideas and projects (Fuchs
et al. 2023).
Lastly, HEIs are focusing on transparency and the global vision of sustainability.
They are encouraged to create platforms that integrate different sources of data
expressing interconnected results, which will allow for the automatic treatment of
the information produced. This requires careful planning and ﬁnancial commitment
from the institutions (Fuchs et al. 2023).
Class 4 (22,1%) represents approaches HEIs promote SDGs through teaching by
integrating sustainability into the curriculum, thereby preparing students to address
complex real-world problems such as climate change, resource exhaustion, and social
inequality. HEIs play a crucial role in transforming society towards a more sustain-
able development paradigm, challenging worldviews, assumptions, and values. This
Role of Higher Education Institutions in Promoting Sustainable …
573
transformative approach to education is essential for developing future leaders, engi-
neers, economists, and educators who are environmentally conscious and equipped
to lead sustainable initiatives (Obrecht et al. 2022).
Furthermore, HEIs are recognized for their potential to signiﬁcantly impact
society, the economy, and the environment through their core elements, which include
teaching (Son-Turan 2021). By aligning their educational programs with the SDGs,
HEIsensurethatstudentsacquiretheknowledgeandskillsneededtopromotesustain-
able development (Hauser and Ryan 2021). This is achieved by fostering multi-
stakeholder partnerships and industry-academic alliances that enhance the relevance
and applicability of sustainability education (Son-Turan 2021).
Additionally, HEIs are adapting their teaching and professional practice to include
speciﬁc tools and methodologies that align with environmental, social, and economic
sustainability principles, as well as the principles of the circular economy (Pedro et al.
2022). By doing so, they are actively contributing to the achievement of the SDGs
at both national and global levels (Table 4).
Teaching in the context of higher education institutions (HEIs) is intricately
connected to various aspects of academic and operational activities, as reﬂected
in the cited texts.
Table 4 Context of teaching conducted by HEIs to promote SDGs
Tools
Context of research
Authors
Business
Teaching often involves collaboration with businesses to enhance
the practical relevance of the curriculum and provide students
with real-world insights. Partnerships with businesses can lead to
guest lectures or case studies that enrich the teaching experience
Obrecht et al.
(2022)
Partnership
Partnerships are central to teaching as they can bring external
expertise into the classroom, provide opportunities for applied
research, and help develop curricula that address speciﬁc societal
needs
Discipline
Teaching across different disciplines can beneﬁt from partnerships
that bring diverse perspectives and expertise, fostering
interdisciplinary learning and research
Basis
The basis of teaching can be enhanced through partnerships that
provide a foundation for applied learning, integrating theory with
practice and addressing speciﬁc local or global challenges
Hauser and
Ryan (2021)
Framework
The three-dimensional framework proposed for mapping
partnerships can also be applied to teaching, helping to identify
where the beneﬁts of partnerships are most effectively realized
within the pedagogical context
574
A. B. A. Avelar and M. L. Pajuelo-Moreno
5
Conclusion
HEIs play a critical role in achieving SDGs through their interconnected missions of
teaching, research, and outreach. A systematic approach was used to identify, screen,
and analyze relevant articles, employing both qualitative and quantitative methods
to examine the role of HEIs in promoting the SDGs. HEIs have the potential to
signiﬁcantly impact society, the economy, and the environment through their teaching
and research.
There is a growing body of literature on the role of HEIs in promoting the SDGs,
with a slight prevalence of analyses in developing countries and a need for more
international collaboration.
The integration of the SDGs into academic curricula is crucial, and there is a need
for a more holistic and interconnected approach to sustainability in higher education.
The literature review highlights the need for HEIs to adopt interdisciplinary and
transdisciplinary approaches to effectively contribute to sustainable development.
ResearchpapersfocusontheintegrationofSDGsintouniversitycurricula,empha-
sizing the importance of student awareness and engagement in sustainability issues.
Student awareness and engagement are recognized as important factors for promoting
university sustainability and will be inﬂuential in the future.
There are existing gaps in the strategic approach to integrating SDGs into higher
education that need to be addressed for more effective integration. Moreover, more
research is needed, especially in developing countries and regions.
Outreach activities conducted by HEIs are essential for fostering a society that
values sustainability, inclusivity, and collective well-being. The Literature Review
demonstrated outreach activities conducted by HEIs are essential for fostering a
society that values sustainability, inclusivity, and collective well-being. So, article
advocates for the critical role of HEIs in advancing sustainability and inclusivity
through outreach activities, which not only beneﬁt the institutions and their students
but also the wider community and society as a whole.
The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the signiﬁcance of resilient and partici-
patory planning, with HEIs playing a crucial role in recovery and promoting sustain-
able practices. HEIs contribute to democratic processes and social engagement
through outreach, which is aligned with sustainable management education and
involves collaboration with various stakeholders. Through outreach, HEIs are seen
as transformative entities that integrate sustainability into their curricula, research,
and community engagement efforts, ensuring that future generations are prepared
to address complex sustainability issues. Barriers to innovation and sustainability
in higher education are identiﬁed, including a disconnect and lack of understanding
of SDGs among students and professionals, but the causes of these barriers are not
deeply analyzed.
Despite the contributions, Literature Review has limitations. Only articles in
English, published in journals, were considered for this research, omitting, for
example, conference articles and research in other languages, which may also contain
Role of Higher Education Institutions in Promoting Sustainable …
575
relevant information. Future research should focus on developing countries to better
understand and enhance the effectiveness of HEIs’ outreach efforts.
References
Agbedahin AV (2019) Sustainable development, education for sustainable development, and the
2030 agenda for sustainable development: emergence, efﬁcacy, eminence, and future. Sustain
Dev 27(4):669–680. https://doi.org/10.1002/sd.1931
Alcántara-Rubio L, Valderrama-Hernández R, Solís-Espallargas C, Ruiz-Morales J (2022) The
implementationoftheSDGsinuniversities:asystematicreview.EnvironEducRes28(11):1585–
1615. https://doi.org/10.1080/13504622.2022.2063798
Aleixo AM, Leal S, Azeiteiro UM (2021) Higher education students’ perceptions of sustain-
able development in Portugal. J Clean Prod 327:129429. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.
129429
Alonso-García S, Aznar-Díaz I, Caceres-Reche MP, Trujillo-Torres JM, Romero-Rodriguez JM
(2019) Systematic review of good teaching practices with ICT in Spanish Higher Education:
trends and challenges for sustainability. Sustainability 11(24):7150. https://doi.org/10.3390/su1
1247150
Annan-Diab F, Molinari C (2017) Interdisciplinarity: practical approach to advancing education for
sustainability and for the sustainable development goals. Int J Manag Educ 15(2):73–83. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijme.2017.03.006
Avelar ABA, Farina MC (2022) The relationship between the incorporation of sustainability in
higher education and the student’s behavior: self-reported sustainable behavior scale. Int J
Sustain High Educ 23(7):1749–1767. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-07-2021-0260
Avelar ABA, da Silva-Oliveira KD, da Silva Pereira R (2019) Education for advancing the imple-
mentation of the sustainable development goals: a systematic approach. Int J Manag Educ
17(3):100322. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijme.2019.100322
Avelar ABA, Farina MC, da Silva Pereira R (2022a) Principles for responsible management
education-PRME: Collaboration among researchers. Int J Manag Educ 20(2):100642. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijme.2022.100642
Avelar ABA, Silva-Oliveira KDD, Farina MC, Pereira RDS (2022b) Contribution of PRME in
education, research, and outreach in Brazilian higher education institutions. Int J Sustain High
Educ 23(2):283–300. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-09-2020-0350
AvelarABA,daSilvaOliveiraKD,FarinaMC(2023)Theintegrationofthesustainabledevelopment
goals into curricula, research and partnerships in higher education. Int Rev Educ 69(3):299–325.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11159-023-10013-1
Bautista-Puig N, Orduña-Malea E, Perez-Esparrells C (2022) Enhancing sustainable development
goals or promoting universities? an analysis of the times higher education impact rankings. Int
J Sustain High Educ 23(8):211–231. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-07-2021-0309
Berchin II, Santa SLB, de Andrade Guerra JBSO (2019) Community outreach on sustainability. In:
Encyclopedia of sustainability in higher education. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp
250–254. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-11352-0_201
Blasco N, Brusca I, Labrador M (2020) Drivers for universities’ contribution to the sustainable
development goals: An analysis of Spanish public universities. Sustainability 13(1):89. https://
doi.org/10.3390/su13010089
Bohunovsky L, Radinger-Peer V, Zint M, Penker M (2023) Change agents under tensions: a paradox
approach to strategies for transforming higher education toward sustainability. Int J Sustain High
Educ 24(9):372–392. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-12-2022-0393
Booth A, Sutton A, Papaionnou D (2016) Systematic approaches to a successful literature review.
Sage Publication
576
A. B. A. Avelar and M. L. Pajuelo-Moreno
Chankseliani M, McCowan T (2021) Higher education and the sustainable development goals. High
Educ 81(1):1–8. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10734-020-00652-w
Cottafava D, Ascione GS, Corazza L, Dhir A (2022) Sustainable development goals research
in higher education institutions: an interdisciplinarity assessment through an entropy-based
indicator. J Bus Res 151:138–155. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2022.06.050
de Andrade JBSO, Garcia J, de Andrade Lima M, Barbosa SB, Heerdt ML, Berchin II (2018) A
proposal of a balanced scorecard for an environmental education program at universities. J Clean
Prod 172:1674–1690. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.11.179
de Castro Pena JC, de Assis JC, da Silva RA, Honda LK, Pagani MI, Ribeiro MC (2017) Beyond the
mining pit: the academic role in social deliberation for participatory environmental planning.
Perspect Ecol Conserv 15(3):194–198. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pecon.2017.06.006
Dreval OY, Martynets VV, Opanasiuk YA, Pavlenko OO (2022) A country’s economic growth and
rankings of higher education institutions: is there a relationship? Available at: https://essuir.
sumdu.edu.ua/handle/123456789/91517
Dyllick T (2015) Responsible management education for a sustainable world: the challenges for
business schools. J Manag Dev 34(1):16–33. https://doi.org/10.1108/JMD-02-2013-0022
Fia M, Ghasemzadeh K, Paletta A (2023) How higher education institutions walk their talk on the
2030 agenda: a systematic literature review. High Educ Pol 36(3):599–632. https://doi.org/10.
1057/s41307-022-00277-x
Finatto CP, Aguiar Dutra AR, Gomes da Silva C, Nunes NA, Osório de Andrade Guerra JB (2023)
The role of universities in the inclusion of refugees in higher education and in society from the
perspective of the SDGs. Int J Sustain High Educ 24:742–61. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-
07-2021-0275
Findler F, Schönherr N, Lozano R, Reider D, Martinuzzi A (2019) The impacts of higher education
institutions on sustainable development: a review and conceptualization. Int J Sustain High Educ
20(1):23–38. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-07-2017-0114
Franco I, Saito O, Vaughter P, Whereat J, Kanie N, Takemoto K (2019) Higher education for
sustainable development: actioning the global goals in policy, curriculum and practice. Sustain
Sci 14:1621–1642. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-018-0628-4
Fuchs PG, Finatto CP, Birch RS, de Aguiar Dutra AR, de Andrade Guerra JBSO (2023) Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) in Latin-American Universities. Sustainability 15(11):8556. https://
doi.org/10.3390/su15118556
García-Feijoo M, Eizaguirre A, Rica-Aspiunza A (2020) Systematic review of sustainable-
development-goal deployment in business schools. Sustainability 12(1):440. https://doi.org/10.
3390/su12010440
González-Torre PL, Suárez-Serrano E (2022) A framework for implementing and reporting United
Nations sustainable development goals in Spanish higher education institutions. Int J Sustain
High Educ 23(6):1349–1365. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-03-2021-0118
Haertle J, Parkes C, Murray A, Hayes R (2017) PRME: building a global movement on responsible
management education. Int J Manag Educ 15(2):66–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijme.2017.
05.002
Hauser C, Ryan A (2021) Higher education institutions, PRME and partnerships for the goals:
retroﬁt labeling or driving force for change? Sustain Acc Manag Policy J 12(6):1268–1288.
https://doi.org/10.1108/SAMPJ-03-2020-0069
Hueske AK, Pontoppidan CA (2020) GEROCO: a model for integrating sustainability in manage-
ment education at HEIs. In: Leadership strategies for promoting social responsibility in higher
education, vol 24. Emerald Publishing Limited, pp 93–109. https://doi.org/10.1108/S2055-364
120200000024009
Jesson J, Matheson L, Lacey F (2011) Doing your literature review. Sage Publications, p 192.
Available at: http://digital.casalini.it/9781446209899
Kolb AY, Kolb DA (2017) Experiential learning theory as a guide for experiential educators in
higher education. Exp Learn Teach Higher Educ 1(1):7–44. https://doi.org/10.46787/elthe.v1i1.
3362
Role of Higher Education Institutions in Promoting Sustainable …
577
Körfgen A, Förster K, Glatz I, Maier S, Becsi B, Meyer A et al (2018) It’sa hit! Mapping Austrian
research contributions to the sustainable development goals. Sustainability 10(9):3295. https://
doi.org/10.3390/su10093295
Lange Salvia A, Londero Brandli L, Leal Filho W, Gasparetto Rebelatto B, Reginatto G (2020)
Energy sustainability in teaching and outreach initiatives and the contribution to the 2030 agenda.
Int J Sustain High Educ 21(7):1607–1624. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-05-2020-0180
Lazzarini B, Pérez-Foguet A, Boni A (2018) Key characteristics of academics promoting sustainable
human development within engineering studies. J Clean Prod 188:237–252. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jclepro.2018.03.270
Leal Filho W, Pallant E, Enete A, Richter B, Brandli LL (2018) Planning and implementing sustain-
ability in higher education institutions: an overview of the difﬁculties and potentials. Int J Sust
Dev World 25(8):713–721. https://doi.org/10.1080/13504509.2018.1461707
Leal Filho W, Shiel C, Paço A, Mifsud M, Ávila LV, Brandli LL et al (2019) Sustainable development
goals and sustainability teaching at universities: falling behind or getting ahead of the pack? J
Clean Prod 232:285–294. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.05.309
Leal Filho W, Frankenberger F, Salvia AL, Azeiteiro U, Alves F, Castro P et al (2021) A framework
for the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals in university programmes. J Clean
Prod 299:126915. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.126915
Leal Filho W, Simaens A, Paço A, Hernandez-Diaz PM, Vasconcelos CR, Fritzen B, Mac-Lean
C (2023) Integrating the sustainable development goals into the strategy of higher education
institutions. Int J Sustain Dev World Ecol 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1080/13504509.2023.216
7884
Longoria LC, López-Forniés I, Sáenz DC, Sierra-Pérez J (2021) Promoting sustainable consumption
in Higher Education Institutions through integrative co-creative processes involving relevant
stakeholders.SustainProdConsumption28:445–458.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spc.2021.06.009
Medved P, Ursic M (2021) The beneﬁts of university collaboration within university–community
partnerships in Europe. J Higher Educ Outreach Engagem 25(2). Available at: http://openjourn
als.libs.uga.edu/index.php/jheoe
Miotto G, Del-Castillo-Feito C, Blanco-González A (2020) Reputation and legitimacy: key factors
for Higher Education Institutions’ sustained competitive advantage. J Bus Res 112:342–353.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2019.11.076
Monteiro S, Ribeiro V, Molho C (2023) A 5 pillars approach to the sustainable development goals
performance and reporting in Portuguese higher education institutions. Proposal for an applied
framework. Int J Sustain Higher Educ No. Ahead-of-print. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-02-
2023-0047
Mora JG, Serra MA, Vieira MJ (2018) Social engagement in Latin American universities. High
Educ Pol 31:513–534. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41307-017-0069-1
Muff K, Kapalka A, Dyllick T (2017) The gap frame-translating the SDGs into relevant national
grand challenges for strategic business opportunities. Int J Manag Educ 15(2):363–383. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijme.2017.03.004
Obrecht M, Feodorova Z, Rosi M (2022) Assessment of environmental sustainability integration
into higher education for future experts and leaders. J Environ Manag 316:115223. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2022.115223
Page MJ, McKenzie JE, Bossuyt PM, Boutron I, Hoffmann TC, Mulrow CD et al (2021) Declaración
PRISMA 2020: una guía actualizada para la publicación de revisiones sistemáticas. Revista
Española de Cardiología 74(9):790–799. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.recesp.2021.06.016
Pedro J, Matos P, Correia V (2022).Sustentabilidade em projectos de design: Uma proposta de
aplicação da sustentabilidade à educação e à prática proﬁssional. Convergences-J Res Arts
Educ 15(30):13–21. https://doi.org/10.53681/c1514225187514391s.30.138
Pietrzak P (2022) The involvement of public Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) in Poland in the
promotion of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in the age of social media. Information
13(10):473. https://doi.org/10.3390/info13100473
578
A. B. A. Avelar and M. L. Pajuelo-Moreno
Piza V, Aparicio JL, Rodríguez C, Marín R, Beltrán J, Bedolla R (2018) Sustainability in higher
education: a didactic strategy for environmental mainstreaming. Sustainability 10(12):4556.
https://doi.org/10.3390/su10124556
Plummer R, Witkowski S, Smits A, Dale G (2022) Appraising HEI-community partnerships:
Assessing performance, monitoring progress, and evaluating impacts. Gateways: Int J Commu-
nity Res Engagem 15(1):1–17. Available at: https://doi.org/10.3316/informit.715220933716663
Reinert M (1990) Une méthode de classiﬁcation des énoncés d’un corpus présentée à l’aide d’une
application. Les cahiers de l’analyse des données. 15(1):21–36.
Retinaud P, Marchand P (2012) Application de la méthode ALCESTE aux gros corpus et stabilité
des mondes lexicaus: analyse du CableGate avec IRAMUTEQ. In: Actes des 11eme Journées
internationales d‘Analyse statistique des Données Textuelles, Liège, Belgique, pp 835–844
Secundo G, Ndou V, Del Vecchio P, De Pascale G (2020) Sustainable development, intellec-
tual capital and technology policies: a structured literature review and future research agenda.
Technol Forecast Soc Chang 153:119917. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.119917
Seraﬁni PG, de Moura JM, de Almeida MR, de Rezende JFD (2022) Sustainable development goals
in higher education institutions: a systematic literature review. J Clean Prod 133473. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.133473
Shiel C, Leal Filho W, do Paço A, Brandli L (2016) Evaluating the engagement of universities
in capacity building for sustainable development in local communities. Eval Program Plann
54:123–134. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.evalprogplan.2015.07.006
Sonetti G, Brown M, Naboni E (2019) About the triggering of UN sustainable development goals
and regenerative sustainability in higher education. Sustainability 11(1):254. https://doi.org/10.
3390/su11010254
Son-Turan S (2021) The HESFS for higher education funding, employment and sustainability. Int
J Sustain High Educ 22(1):100–119. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-10-2019-0310
Stahlschmidt S, Stephen D (2020) Comparison of web of science, scopus and dimensions databases.
KB Forschungspoolprojekt, DZHW, Hannover, Germany
Unangst L, Crea TM (2020) Higher education for refugees: a need for intersectional research. Comp
Educ Rev 64(2):228–248. https://doi.org/10.1086/708190
UNESCO (2017) Education for sustainable development goals: learning objectives. Paris:
UNESCO. Retrieved March 13, 2020, from: http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0024/002474/
247444e.pdf
Useh U (2021) Sustainable development goals as a framework for postgraduate future research
following COVID-19 pandemic: a new norm for developing countries. Higher Educ Future
8(1):123–132
Veiga Ávila L, Beuron TA, Brandli LL, Damke LI, Pereira RS, Klein LL (2019) Barriers to inno-
vation and sustainability in universities: an international comparison. Int J Sustain High Educ
20(5):805–821. https://doi.org/10.1177/2347631120972064
Vickers M, McCarthy F, Zammit K (2017) Peer mentoring and intercultural understanding: support
for refugee-background and immigrant students beginning university study. Int J Intercult Relat
60:198–209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijintrel.2017.04.015
Walker K (2010) A systematic review of the corporate reputation literature: deﬁnition, measurement,
and theory. Corp Reput Rev 12(4):357–387. https://doi.org/10.1057/crr.2009.26
Weiss M, Barth M (2019) Global research landscape of sustainability curricula implementation in
higher education. Int J Sustain High Educ 20(4):570–589. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-10-
2018-0190
Wersun A (2017) Context and the institutionalization of PRME: the case of the University for the
common good. Int J Manag Educ 15(2):249–262. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijme.2017.02.012
Zamora-Polo F, Sánchez-Martín J, Corrales-Serrano M, Espejo-Antúnez L (2019) What do univer-
sity students know about sustainable development goals? a realistic approach to the reception
of this UN program amongst the youth population. Sustainability 11(13):3533. https://doi.org/
10.3390/su11133533
Supporting Research and Education
Stakeholders in Meeting the Sustainable
Development Goals Through the HESI
SDG Publishers Compact Fellows
Derek M. Lough, Rebecca Kirk, Victoria Gardner, Nikita Lad,
and Gerald Beasley
Abstract The communication of research relating to the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) is an essential aspect of delivering meaningful change towards the
goals. Here, we outline the strategy and activities of the Higher Education Sustain-
ability Initiative (HESI) Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) Publishers Compact
Fellows who are a diverse and action-oriented group of volunteers. International
representatives across educational sectors including academia, publishing, tech-
nology, and related industries e-meet weekly. During general meetings and topical
working groups, the Fellows collaborate to drive progress toward the United Nations
SDGs by organizing the provision of advice, training, practical tools, and actionable
guidance. In this chapter, we share some of the challenges and opportunities that these
stakeholders face while supporting the aims of the SDGs, as well as a brief history
of the creation of the SDG Publishers Compact and the Fellows. We outline the role
of the interdisciplinary Fellows in supporting each stakeholder group alongside our
philosophy of driving this emerging international trend through both ‘quick wins’
and system change. We then highlight our top tips, our event series, and the role of
the Fellows group itself in structuring public engagement with the SDGs within and
across international institutions, education, research, and publishing. Taken together,
D. M. Lough (B)
Illinois State University, 400 N. Center St. #3772, Bloomington, IL 61702, USA
e-mail: dlough@ilstu.edu
R. Kirk
PLOS, Nine Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 1GE, UK
e-mail: rkirk@plos.org
V. Gardner
Taylor & Francis Group, 4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxfordshire OX14 4RN, UK
N. Lad
George Mason University, 4400 University Dr., Fairfax, VA MS 5F222030, USA
e-mail: nlad2@gmu.edu
G. Beasley
Former University Librarian, 5727 Ave Notre-Dame-de-Grace, Montreal, QC H4A 1M2, Canada
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_32
579
580
D. M. Lough et al.
this chapter provides practical suggestions around how to build on the momentum
generated by the SDG Publishers Compact, and the tools provided by the Fellows.
1
Introduction
Launched at the Frankfurter Buchmesse, an annual event for the publishing industry
(SDG Publishers Compact 2020), the Publishers Compact builds upon the founda-
tions laid by the United Nations (UN) Global Compact, which has been advocating
for ten principles of sustainability for the past two decades (UN Global Compact
2024). Both the SDG Publishers Compact and the UN Global Compact align with
the international community’s objectives, particularly the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). The UN Global Compact addresses corporate sustainability across
various sectors, while the SDG Publishers Compact is tailored to the needs of the
publishing industry. The commitments under the SDG Publishers Compact revolve
around ten action points designed to further the SDGs (United Nations 2023a, b).
These actions include promoting and publishing content that educates, develops,
and motivates action towards these goals, advocating for the SDGs, and maintaining
responsible production and business ethics (Fig. 1). The commitments in Fig. 1 are
taken directly from the UN Publishers Compact website (United Nations 2023a, b).
Potential signatories have the option to sign up to the Compact immediately after
reading the ten principles. These principles echo the UN Global Compact’s focus
on human rights, labor, environment, and anti-corruption. Both Compacts foster a
culture of collaboration and networking among their participants, encouraging a
collective movement toward sustainability. They provide platforms for sharing best
practices and facilitating cooperative learning. The voluntary nature of participation
in both Compacts underscores the role of the private sector and the importance of
industry-speciﬁc contributions to sustainable development.
Approximately one year following the launch of the Publishers Compact, the
SDG Publishers Compact Fellows emerged as a manifestation of this broader ethos.
Their focus is on identifying and implementing necessary actions for all parties in
the publishing sector to achieve the SDGs.
Figure 2 outlines this chapter, which will include the initiation of the Fellows,
their development as a multi-stakeholder volunteer group, and provide examples and
case studies from this group for actionable interventions to drive forwards the SDGs
in scholarly communications and the broader research community.
2
The Ambition and Complexities of SDGs
The SDGs, introduced by the United Nations in 2015, represent an ambitious and
far-reaching plan designed to tackle some of the world’s most pressing challenges.
These 17 goals are committed to ending poverty, ﬁghting hunger, providing quality
Supporting Research and Education Stakeholders in Meeting …
581
Fig. 1 SDG Publishers Compact Commitments. United Nations
education, and protecting our environment, among other vital objectives. They form
an equitable roadmap for building a world that is prosperous while also focused on
harmony with the biosphere.
The true challenge of the SDGs lies in their interconnected nature, addressing a
wide array of issues simultaneously. Progress in one area can signiﬁcantly impact
others, weaving a complex tapestry of cause and effect. This interconnectedness
calls for strategies that are both comprehensive and ﬁnely tuned. This challenge
affects policy-making, allocation of resources, and practical implementation in varied
global scenarios. The goals highlight the need for substantial ﬁnancial investment,
innovative approaches, and a commitment to collaboration, particularly in developing
countries with fewer resources (United Nations 2023a, b).
In this landscape, the publishing industry and the SDG Publishers Compact
Fellows have a critical role. The publishing sector is uniquely positioned to educate,
inform, and shape public opinion and policy (SDG Publishers Compact Fellows
2022b). Under the SDG Publishers Compact (Fig. 1), industry leaders pledge to
support these goals by promoting relevant materials, advocating sustainable prac-
tices, and setting examples of responsible business behavior. Their choices and
actions are key to guiding the publishing sector’s contribution towards achieving
the SDGs, managing its complexities while underscoring the importance of these
582
D. M. Lough et al.
Fig. 2 Chapter outline. SDG
Publishers Compact Fellows
transformative objectives. The Compact Fellows are at the forefront of steering the
industry towards these sustainable goals.
3
HESI SDG Publishers Compact Fellows
3.1
Construction of the Fellows
Heady exuberance, a determined feeling, and the slight anxiety of venturing into the
unknown imbued the ﬁrst publishers and academics to form the SDG Publishers
Compact Fellows under the Higher Education Sustainability Initiative. It began
with an inquiry to the UN and the International Association of Scientiﬁc, Tech-
nical, and Medical Publishers (STM) by the President at the US Partnership for
Education for Sustainable Development and the President of Yorkville University
in Toronto, ON. The Global Director for Sustainability at Elsevier helped form the
Supporting Research and Education Stakeholders in Meeting …
583
Publishers Compact in 2020 and answered this new call to form a working group to
address implementing necessary changes within the publishing industry. Over time,
the group swelled to include the Associate Director of the Pedro Arrupe Center for
Business Ethics at Saint Joseph University, as well as the Director of International
Marketing and Development at Cabells, who stated about those early days, “We were
a group of publishers and academics from several different countries who all wanted
to be involved with something that meant more than getting a company name on
a website—we wanted to see real action towards the SDGs being realized by the
publishing community.” Soon after the idea for the Fellows was realized.
In October 2021, a general meeting of the Publishers Compact Fellows took place
after a call-in at the 2021 International Conference on Sustainable Development,
bringing together a diverse group of professionals centered around the publishing
industry. This included both everyday practitioners and high-level executives actively
engaged in implementing sustainability practices within their organizations. The
founding members also encompassed scholars from various regions, including the
Global North and South, alongside graduate students who are emerging as thought
leaders in the ﬁeld of sustainability. The group is now further enriched by the partic-
ipation of librarians from academic institutions and business development experts
from the private sector. This assembly of dedicated professionals, all volunteers, met
to address next steps in forging a sustainable future.
3.2
Supporting Research and Education Stakeholders
in Meeting the SDGs
The HESI SDG Publishers Compact Fellows Action Group now stands out as a
leading force in steering sustainable development research. Having been created
with the purpose of supporting actionable outcomes for the UN SDG Publishers
Compact, its mission is to be a tangible resource to researchers and educators across
the international publishing industry. The Group envisions effective collaboration
across sectors to practically implement the SDGs by 2030 (SDG Publishers Compact
Fellows 2022b). Much of its work is done at the center of a network of stakeholders in
sustainability as it advances the intricate outputs necessary to create lasting outcomes.
Volunteer representatives from across educational and research sectors including
academia, publishing, technology, and related industries meet weekly (SDG
Publishers Compact Fellows 2023c). During general meetings and topical working
groups, the Fellows collaborate to drive progress toward the UN SDGs through the
provision of advice, training, practical tools, and actionable guidance.
584
D. M. Lough et al.
4
Multifaceted Stakeholder Perspectives
The realization of interconnected objectives like the SDGs inherently demands inter-
disciplinary collaboration. Fulﬁlling such ambitious targets necessitates the fusion of
highaspirationswithpracticalpossibilities.ThisprincipleguidedtheSDGPublishers
Compact Fellows as we tackled the various challenges presented by the Compact’s
ten commitments (Fig. 1). Similarly, as a HESI action group, we were inspired by
our parent organization to establish four focused working sub-groups/workstreams
to cater to speciﬁc stakeholder requirements. One was dedicated to enhancing the
inclusion of SDG-related content in academic publications and textbooks. Another
aimed to bridge the gap between research and practice, ensuring that practitioners
have direct access to the latest ﬁndings. The third group concentrated on motivating
and rewarding the creation of SDG-focused research. The fourth group, tasked with
shaping cultural change, explored ways to fast-track the adoption of the SDGs, recog-
nizing their growing importance on the global stage. Throughout this journey, the
Fellows committed to merging existing research with the needs of various stake-
holders, not only initiating swift, impactful changes but also creating pathways for
systematic adaptation to the evolving landscape of the global SDGs. The Fellows’
mission is to synergize existing research with diverse stakeholder needs, striving for
immediate impactful changes and long-term systematic evolution in line with global
SDG dynamics (SDG Publishers Compact Fellows 2022b).
4.1
The Evolution of Publishing in the Context of the SDGs
The SDG Publishers Compact, initiated to motivate publishers towards SDG achieve-
ment, emphasizes the pivotal role of publishers in informing and inspiring action
(SDG Publishers Compact et al. 2020). Hundreds of publishers have embraced its
principles, showcasing the Compact’s role in driving industry change. The publishing
ﬁeld is markedly diverse, encompassing a wide array of organizations with different
objectives and community engagements. This diversity is mirrored in the Compact’s
signatories, indicating varied approaches towards SDG contribution and commitment
implementation (United Nations 2020).
Focus areas differ, with some prioritizing environmental sustainability, as
evidenced by initiatives around Goal 13: Climate Action (Johnston and Pickett
2022; Martin et al. 2023). Publishers’ inﬂuence extends beyond direct organizational
actions, as exempliﬁed by publishing trade body STM’s aggregation of member activ-
ities supporting Climate Action (STM Association 2023b; Wise 2021; International
Publishers Association 2021). However, publishers play a crucial role in dissemi-
nating research that informs stakeholders’ actions towards all SDGs, with challenges
in optimizing such dissemination being discussed industry wide (Irfanullah 2022,
2023; Folan 2023).
Supporting Research and Education Stakeholders in Meeting …
585
To enhance the identiﬁcation and ampliﬁcation of SDG-related research, the
Fellowscompiledindustryeffortsforafutureuniﬁedtaxonomy,contributingtocross-
industry progress and aiding STM’s development of an SDG roadmap for publishers
(Ratings, Rankings and Assessment and SDG Publishers Compact Fellows 2023, b,
c, d, e; STM Association 2023b). The development of an aligned SDG taxonomy
is ongoing and is now led by STM, with a focus on developing a web-based solu-
tion that would be available to all publishers without customization, integration, or
technological investment.
The SDG Publishers Compact was launched with the aim of inspiring action
among publishers and publishing associations to drive meaningful change towards
achieving the SDGs. The press release speciﬁcally called out the important role that
publishers have in achieving the goals by “publishing books and journals that will
help inform, develop and inspire action in that direction” (SDG Publishers Compact
et al. 2020). In the three years since the launch, the SDG Publishers Compact has
been a catalyst for change. These factors together have resulted in publishers and
their associations being one of the key stakeholder groups for the Fellows to engage
with, and for the Fellows to be drawn from.
4.2
Libraries and Academic Institutions
Librariesandacademicinstitutionsplayapivotalroleinmakingacademicpublishers’
works accessible. However, the gap between academic outputs and practical impacts,
such as policy inﬂuence, often persists due to barriers like paywalls and language.
Recognizingthis,theFellowshaveinitiatedmultipleprojectsthatspeciﬁcallyaddress
these challenges.
A key objective is for libraries and academic institutions to support both the
production and dissemination of sustainable research. The Fellows’ top tips (Fig. 3
and outlined in more detail below) initiative has signiﬁcantly contributed to this goal
(Havemann et al. 2023). Moreover, the formation of a Joint Task Force on Outcomes
and Impacts, in collaboration with another HESI Action Group, the Rating, Rankings
and Assessment Action Group, marks a signiﬁcant step in deﬁning and advancing
these objectives (Ratings, Rankings and Assessment and SDG Publishers Compact
Fellows 2023).
Libraries and academic institutions are often in a position to make the work
of academic publishers available to their communities. Indeed, academic research,
even when published in journals or monographs, often remains inaccessible to the
policymakers and practitioners who would most beneﬁt from it. The Joint Task
Force has explored this issue and notes that this is often due to a focus on incen-
tivizing outputs (such as the number of academic publications) over outcomes or
impacts (such as reducing poverty). Barriers to access for those outside academia are
often ﬁnancial (e.g. the research may be located behind a paywall) and the Fellows
are therefore keen to explore the beneﬁts of open access, open data, open educa-
tional resources, and open research. However, many other barriers to the equitable
586
D. M. Lough et al.
Fig. 3 top action tips for Academic Librarians. SDG Publishers Compact Fellows
distribution of knowledge also exist, especially concerning language. Since a large
proportion of researchers come from the Global South, widely accessible publica-
tions are not usually available in these academics’ and practitioners’ ﬁrst languages.
Additionally, research outputs typically employ specialist technical language that
makes sense to the author’s academic peers but unfortunately less so to the action-
oriented people who work outside the academic domain. Therefore, the opportunity
for academic publishers to interact with representatives from libraries and academic
institutions to address these issues is one of the most signiﬁcant opportunities that a
multi stakeholder group like the SDG Publishers Compact Fellows can offer. It has
already inspired several initiatives engaged in by the Fellows, notably including the
taxonomy outlined above that aims to connect academic research outputs to indi-
vidual SDGs and a well-attended workshop (Hazlett 2023) for researchers interested
in adding Plain Language Summaries (PLS) to their research articles. PLS are added
to academic journal articles so that they can reach a wider audience by summa-
rizing ﬁndings in terms that are accessible (and comprehensible) to people outside
the research discipline.
The long-term goal is for libraries and academic institutions to support both the
production and dissemination of research related to sustainable research. The top
tips for librarians played a large role in their activation (Havemann et al. 2023).
One lever to achieve this long-term goal is through recognizing and celebrating
those institutions that already align their work with this goal. The Joint Task Force
on Outcomes and Impacts has focused on this aspiration in its work. The Task Force
met almost monthly since September 2022 and recently produced a report containing
important deﬁnitions and recommendations for next steps, including tiering higher
education institutions, positioning applied research as equal to pure research, and the
Supporting Research and Education Stakeholders in Meeting …
587
use of artiﬁcial intelligence (Ratings, Rankings and Assessment and SDG Publishers
Compact Fellows 2023).
4.3
Research Sector
The research sector is instrumental in achieving the SDGs, where the SDG Publishers
Compact Fellows play a crucial role in fostering global SDG-focused research. The
group emphasizes practical applications of research, cross-disciplinary collabora-
tions, and accessibility of research ﬁndings to non-specialists. This approach aims
to equip various stakeholders, including policymakers and the public, with action-
able information to advance SDGs. Graduate students within the Fellows team also
contribute by developing action tips for research alignment with SDGs (Ashida 2022;
Worthington et al. 2023). This holistic approach underscores the sector’s responsi-
bility in advancing technologies and knowledge for SDG fulﬁllment. The research
sector plays a vital role in the achievement of the SDGs through a multitude of
initiatives, collaborations, and inventive projects. In this realm, the SDG Publishers
CompactFellowsformacommittedgroupsingularlyfocusedonleveragingthepower
of publishing to drive SDG-related outcomes. This group is focused on incentivizing
and recognizing the production of research centered around the SDGs. Martin (2023)
found that when publishers were asked to share their research on the SDGs, around
30% of research revolves around or is related to the SDGs. The third goal, Good
Health and Well-being is the most well-known, while SDG 13 (Climate Action) is
widely referenced (Fig. 4).
Fig. 4 SDG-related research. Sustainable solutions summit. Martin (2023)
588
D. M. Lough et al.
The research sector holds a major place in bringing advanced technologies and
improving existing knowledge for achieving the SDGs. Thus, empowering this sector
requires signiﬁcant attention and efforts, which the Fellows are working towards.
4.4
Education and the SDGs in a Global Context
Integrating global sustainability goals into education is even more crucial today
when skepticism about science is increasingly evident (Alberts 2022). Though still
in K-12 classrooms, the next generation of voters needs to understand the urgency
of climate change and efforts to limit global temperature rise. Educators face the
challenge of explaining whether global efforts to address these issues have been
successful or not (Lough 2022; Watts 2023). The resilience shown by students during
the global pandemic demonstrates the potential of international cooperation, empha-
sizing the need for education systems, particularly in the Global South, to adopt the
UN Agenda 2030 and the 17 SDGs. Agbedahin (2019) highlights the necessity of
effective governance and political will for the real implementation of sustainable
development strategies.
To avoid exacerbating the humanitarian crises predicted by scientiﬁc research,
education systems at all levels should engage in sustainable development education
(Iyengar and Kwauk 2021). The SDG Publishers Compact Fellows have addressed
this need through various initiatives. Their development of the Sustainable Develop-
mentGoalsRubricisanotableexample(SDGPublishersCompactFellows2024a,b).
Initially created for textbook editing to enhance sustainability literacy, this rubric has
also become a useful tool for educators in curriculum development and implementa-
tion (Lough et al. 2022). In addition, the Fellows have established partnerships with
entities like the International Council for Local Environmental Initiatives (ICLEI),
an NGO comprising over 1,200 local governments primarily from the Global South.
TheseconnectionsenabletheFellowstotranscendtraditionalresearchandpublishing
barriers, facilitating education that spans societal and national boundaries and more
effectively inﬂuencing policy decisions.
Finally, the Fellows have taken signiﬁcant steps within the publishing industry
by developing an additional top tips resource focused on equity (SDG Publishers
Compact Fellows 2023b). This initiative is at the core of our mission, focusing on
educating industry participants and colleagues to ensure they have the appropriate
tools and access to inﬂuence high-level policymakers. This comprehensive educa-
tional approach is essential for spreading knowledge and fostering awareness of
sustainable development on a global scale. Educating the public through webinars,
academic societies, and hosting events for the publishing industry remains a focal
point for the Fellows.
Supporting Research and Education Stakeholders in Meeting …
589
4.5
Practitioners’ Engagement with the SDGs
The Fellows aim to make sustainable development research practical and actionable
for policymakers and practitioners. This involves creating a bridge between research
ﬁndings and their real-world application, as outlined in the United Nation’s SDG
targets. Accordingly, one of its lists of top tips is aimed speciﬁcally at connecting
researchers and practitioners. More speciﬁcally, the Fellows aim to enable profes-
sionals and practitioners to get the answers they need, make informed decisions,
and enact change at their desks, onsite, in the ﬁeld, or indeed with patients (SDG
Publishers Compact Fellows 2024b). The Fellows also believe that research can help
equip policymakers, science writers, journalists, and the general public with clear
information on decisions, steps, and actions they can take—and pitfalls they can
avoid—when addressing issues related to sustainable development. The theoretical
framework for a bridge between the SDGs and practitioners on the ground has already
been set by the targets which the UN attached to each of the 17 SDGs. But these
targets can hardly be achieved without applying the ﬁndings of higher education.
Research and education initiatives explicitly co-designed and co-produced with
their intended beneﬁciaries are especially valuable in this regard. The Fellows there-
fore seek to convene meetings of researchers and practitioners. This has already been
a focus for two virtual events held in 2023: a Sustainable Solutions Summit on April
5th and a collaboration with the Open Climate Campaign and OpenPharma for a
virtual workshop entitled “Writing for non-academic audiences to achieve progress
towards the SDGs” on May 17th (SDG Publishers Compact Fellows 2023b). More
events are planned for 2024. The Fellows are aware that researchers frequently ﬁnd it
either difﬁcult or unrewarding to link their work to practical outcomes. To help over-
come this barrier, the Fellows act as convenors. Valuable contacts with organizations
such as ICLEI allow the Group to reach beyond higher education to practitioners
on the ground. These initiatives, coupled with strategic partnerships, are designed
to translate academic insights into tangible, on-the-ground solutions for sustainable
development.
5
Translating Vision into Reality
5.1
The Dual Approach: Quick Wins Versus Systemic
Changes
The pursuit of the SDGs by the SDG Publishers Compact Fellows has often centered
around a pivotal question: what is the most effective strategy to drive progress? The
Fellows, a diverse collective of strategic thinkers, problem solvers, and pragmatic
doers, engage in ongoing discussions about the most impactful approach to achieving
these goals. Central to these debates is whether to focus on incremental changes or
to advocate for radical, systemic transformations.
590
D. M. Lough et al.
This dichotomy mirrors broader debates in policy and business sectors about the
nature of change management. In these realms, there is a juxtaposition between the
philosophy of ‘kaizen’, which emphasizes continuous, incremental improvement,
and the concept of business process re-engineering, which advocates for compre-
hensive and radical change (Jin 2020). Both approaches have their merits and can be
effective in different contexts. As a group committed to practical solutions, the SDG
Publishers Compact Fellows have embraced a pragmatic approach that combines
elements of both strategies. We recognize that the path to achieving the SDGs is not
one-size-ﬁts-all but rather depends on the speciﬁc context and requirements of each
situation. This dual approach allows us to adapt and respond ﬂexibly, applying quick
wins where immediate results are feasible while also engaging in deeper, systemic
changes where more fundamental shifts are necessary.
By not limiting ourselves to a singular methodology, we can leverage the strengths
of diverse approaches. Quick wins provide immediate, tangible results that can build
momentum and demonstrate the efﬁcacy of our efforts. Such examples include a
video produced to introduce the Fellows, a policy brief published under the UNESCO
World Higher Education Conference, several author guides, and the top tips aimed at
a variety of stakeholders (SDG Publishers Compact Fellows 2023e). These smaller-
scale achievements can pave the way for broader acceptance and support for larger,
systemic changes. On the other hand, systemic changes, though often challenging
and time-consuming, are crucial for addressing the root causes of issues and bringing
about long-lasting transformations. That type of change requires direct collaboration
outside of the Fellows groups and will be detailed later in this chapter.
In implementing this dual strategy, the HESI SDG Publishers Compact Fellows
aim to strike a balance between the urgency of immediate action and the need for
deep, sustainable change. It is a dynamic process of assessing, adapting, and acting,
always with the ultimate goal of advancing the SDGs in the most effective and
efﬁcient way possible.
5.2
Top Tips for Balancing Incrementation and Radical
Change
The aforementioned top tips have been developed by the Fellows and comprise
practical and actionable tips to help members of the community support the SDGs.
The top tips have become a hallmark of the Fellows, and some are summarized in
Fig. 5 (SDG Publishers Compact Fellows 2022c).
Many of the ideas are easy to implement, requiring only minor changes to prac-
tice. Others are wider reaching. Each tip sheet created by the group typically offers
its target audience a mix of incremental and radical tips that they can choose to
implement in their work and activities.
In the example in Fig. 6, the ﬁrst tip is easy for a graduate researcher or student to
implement (SDG Publishers Compact Fellows 2021). Linking a research project to
Supporting Research and Education Stakeholders in Meeting …
591
Fig. 5 Top actions tips overview. SDG Publishers Compact Fellows
an SDG is a simple action that can help to build out networks and connections. Tip
2 offers the opportunity for longer-term change to the research design process. This
encourages readers to pivot to a ‘systems-thinking’ perspective (Arnold and Wade
2015).
Thetipsheeton“Connectingresearchandpracticeforprofessionals,practitioners,
policymakers and the public” focuses on the longer-term and more radical end of the
change management spectrum (SDG Publishers Compact Fellows 2022a, b, c, d).
Fig. 6 Top action tips for graduate researchers and students. SDG Publishers Compact Fellows
592
D. M. Lough et al.
Fellows reviewed examples across journals, and existing work on sharing the impli-
cations of research, and quickly came to the conclusion that there are many potential
audiences, which could be grouped into two types: those working in professional
environments who can apply what the research has uncovered in their daily work,
and non-specialists who could regulate change, communicate what changes to make,
or make change themselves. To address the different needs of those two groups, the
Fellows produced two sets of guidance for authors about when, how and where
to summarize the practical implications of their work (SDG Publishers Compact
Fellows 2022a). The Fellows have encouraged authors to think about creating lay
summaries, policy digests, or PLS formats (discussed earlier in this chapter) to
communicate the outcomes of their research to non-academic audiences. Feedback
from authors indicates that while there is an appetite to support the production of
this type of work, there is an absence of both incentives and training to support
this output. Many funders and higher education institutions acknowledge this chal-
lenge and are accordingly reforming their research assessment practices to encourage
broader engagement with research ﬁndings (Evaluation Reports Steer Away From
‘Automated’ UK Research Assessment 2022; Early Decisions Made for REF 2028
2023).
However, this broader structural change will take time to bed in and is indicative of
longer-term systems change. As a step towards reforming research assessment prac-
tices, the SDG Publishers Compact Fellows Action group collaborated with HESI’s
Ratings, Rankings and Assessment Group and formed the previously discussed Joint
Task Force on Outcomes and Impacts. Such exploration of how higher education
stakeholders couldmovetowards anoutcome-focusedwithinsustainabilityprocesses
could help academics reinterpret their works in totality, as well as through the SDGs
in particular (SDG Publishers Compact Fellows 2022d).
Our Top Action tips offer practical advice to support publishers, societies and
librarians, researchers and students (who can also be editors, reviewers or authors)
to align with the SDGs and to increase connections to practitioners (Fig. 7).
TheFellowsdonotsimplyadvocateforchangebutaimtoprovidepracticalsupport
and guidance to the communities that they engage with. To encourage researchers
to write for non-academic audiences, the group hosts and collaborates on numerous
events to provide practical tips and advice to attendees on how they might begin
this process themselves (SDG Publishers Compact Fellows 2023d). The Fellows
are keen to empower the communities that we work with to take responsibility for
driving change and to become activists in supporting the SDGs. Solutions Summits
(Fig. 8) are another form of event regularly hosted by the group with an aim to inspire
attendees to become change agents.
The purpose of these events is stated clearly as an information transaction aimed
at actionable outcomes by the attendee (SDG Publishers Compact Fellows 2023d).
These events put the onus on attendees to take responsibility for the role that they
can play in driving change. This isn’t a one-way street, however; we hypothesize that
engagement with the SDGs helps research to have more impact (Martin 2023) and
makes it easier for readers to ﬁnd and make use of the published insights (Meschede
2020). Supporting the SDGs is a win–win for all involved.
Supporting Research and Education Stakeholders in Meeting …
593
Fig. 7 HESI action group webinar. Higher Education Sustainability Initiative
Fig. 8 Purpose of today. Solutions summit. SDG Publishers Compact Fellows
594
D. M. Lough et al.
6
Engagement, Outreach, and The Future
As a small group, the SDG Publishers Compact Fellows face the ongoing challenge of
maximizing the impact of our actions within the practical constraints of limited time
and resources. To extend the reach and effectiveness of our work, we have adopted a
strategy of forging connections with like-minded organizations, pooling resources,
and collaborating to engage broader audiences. Our efforts in this direction have
been multifaceted and productive.
As previously mentioned, in partnership with the publisher trade association STM,
we have co-developed an SDG roadmap. This roadmap offers practical advice and
support to publishers, guiding them towards making substantive progress on the
SDGs beyond merely signing the Publishers Compact (STM Association 2023a).
Another signiﬁcant collaboration has been with the Association for Professional and
Learned Society Publishers (ALPSP). Here, we have supported the creation of a
Special Interest Group on the SDGs, which facilitates the sharing of best practices
and provides guidance to members on integrating the SDGs into their publishing
strategies and programs (Association of Learned and Professional Society Publishers
2023). Additionally, our collaboration extends to organizations such as ICLEI (Local
Governments for Sustainability), the European Association of Scientiﬁc Editors
(EASE), the Open Climate Campaign, and OpenPharma. These partnerships focus
on advocacy and training events, enhancing our collective ability to inﬂuence and
educate (SDG Publishers Compact Fellows 2022c).
Central to all these initiatives is our commitment to maintaining an equity lens
in promoting public engagement with the SDGs. This approach ensures that our
strategies and methodologies are inclusive and considerate of diverse perspectives
and needs (SDG Publishers Compact Fellows 2023b). Through these collaborative
efforts, we aim to amplify our impact and effectively contribute to the global pursuit
of the SDGs.
6.1
Public Engagement with the SDGs
The Fellows play a pivotal role in enhancing public engagement with the UN SDGs.
Central to our mission is fostering widespread awareness and understanding of the
SDGs. The Fellows prioritize creating and disseminating educational and academic
content that is both accessible and engaging to a diverse audience. We work towards
bridging the gap between complex research ﬁndings and their practical implications
for communities, aiming to inspire a cultural shift towards the adoption of sustainable
practices.
In our commitment to promoting equitable access to SDG-related information,
the Fellows have been instrumental in developing resources like the SDG Rubric.
As outlined above, this tool is designed to enhance sustainability literacy across
different educational materials; ensuring the concepts and importance of the SDGs
Supporting Research and Education Stakeholders in Meeting …
595
are effectively communicated to learners of all ages and backgrounds, empowering
advocacy across education for sustainable development (Iyengar and Kwauk 2021;
Lough 2022; Lough et al. 2022). Moreover, the Fellows extend our educational
outreach beyond academic circles, reaching wider societal and international audi-
ences by collaborating with organizations like ICLEI and distributing top tips (Fig. 9)
aimed at different stakeholders (Worthington et al. 2023).
The Fellows’ strategies to reach a broad audience also include hosting impactful
events like the Solutions Summits. These gatherings serve as platforms for change
agents from various sectors to share ideas, strategies, and success stories, thereby
motivating and empowering communities to take actionable steps towards achieving
the SDGs. Furthermore, as outlined, the Fellows actively support researchers in
translating their ﬁndings into formats that resonate with non-academic audiences,
thereby fostering a deeper public understanding and engagement with sustainability
issues (SDG Publishers Compact Fellows 2023d).
Finally, the SDG Publishers Compact Fellows were well represented at the annual
High-Level Political Forum at the UN and presented during the Higher Education
Fig. 9 Example of SDG Publishers Compact Fellows Public Engagement. Higher Education
Sustainability Initiative SDG Publishers Compact Fellows. Logos, 33(4), 45–51. https://doi.org/
10.1163/18784712-03104053
596
D. M. Lough et al.
Fig. 10 High-level political forum special event. United Nations
Sustainability Forum ofﬁcial special event (2023 HESI Global Forum at the 2023
United Nations High-Level Political Forum 2023). A short summary of the past year
and future plans can be seen in Fig. 10.
In the realm of publishing, the Fellows advocate for open access to SDG-related
research and strive to tackle language barriers, ensuring that valuable insights
and innovations are accessible to a global audience. Our support for the SDG
Publishers Compact underscores our commitment to driving action within the
publishing industry, emphasizing the production and dissemination of content that
not only educates but also inspires action toward the SDGs (Mudditt 2023; SDG
Publishers Compact 2020; United Nations 2020). Overall, the SDG Publishers
Compact Fellows’ efforts exemplify a comprehensive and inclusive approach to
advancing the SDGs, with a speciﬁc focus on engaging the public. Our work high-
lights the crucial role of knowledge sharing, cultural inclusivity, and community
empowerment in driving sustainable development worldwide.
Supporting Research and Education Stakeholders in Meeting …
597
7
Lessons Learned and Recommendations for Future
Action
The HESI SDG Publishers Compact Fellows serves as an example of how multi-
stakeholder volunteer collaboration can be powerful and effective. As the Fellows
group has evolved over time, however, important considerations have emerged which
continue to be a source of deliberation, with reﬂections on some major areas noted
below. Awareness of these points may be of value to those considering similar actions.
7.1
Make the Most of Your Resources
Although there is much enthusiasm in the group, the Fellows comprise volunteers
with many demands on their time and availability outside of the group. There have
been challenges in balancing the long list of possible actions and activities with the
capacity of the Fellows to support and deliver. A clearer overview of capacity will
support planning and allocation of resources.
7.2
Focus Can Be Hard to Find
The Fellows have a vast number of avenues to explore to support of driving progress
towards the SDGs. It has been challenging to agree on which avenues might be the
most impactful in supporting our aim, and there has been a temptation to act in
multiple areas simultaneously, which risks the groups’ ability to deliver sustained
change. The Fellows are still understanding how best to balance focus (doing fewer
things well) with the vast array of possible avenues and actions but have been helped
in this work by creating tools such as a Dashboard to provide insight into areas of
activity as well as a series of focused goals to inform priority areas for action.
7.3
Global Representation is Hard to Achieve
TheFellowsstrivetobeinclusiveanddiverse.However,ithasbeendifﬁculttobetruly
representative, due both to practical considerations (time zones) as well as systemic
issues around the burden of representation falling on those from traditionally under-
represented groups and regions. Continued awareness of, and efforts to address this
issue are crucial to driving change and improving representation.
598
D. M. Lough et al.
7.4
Call to Action
The Fellows have set the following goals for future action: building communities
conﬁdent in driving change; establishing best practice, standards and guidance,
and taking action to drive systems change. Partnerships are a critical mechanism
to support in achieving these aims—and the main call to action for readers.
The Fellows strive to align with inﬂuential partners and welcome collaboration
with those who share common goals. Current and future partners include institutions
who are leading the way in changing incentives and research culture to focus on
outcomes not outputs, practitioner organizations such as ICLEI who serve as a bridge
between research and application, and high-level bodies such as the United Nations
whoprovideinspirationforchange.Changingresearchcultureisalsoaboutcontinued
engagement with researchers. The Fellows will continue to partner with and support
academics by making their content more accessible and usable to wider audiences
through future training events, summits, and sharing of the top tips. They will also
advocate for more interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary research as a means to
make progress on the complex and cross disciplinary components of the SDGs.
Theroleofartiﬁcialintelligence(AI)inmakingSDGrelatedcontentmoreﬁndable
and useable is also an area of focus, and one where the Fellows welcome support
from partners. AI could support research translation into local languages for use
by communities, could support with summaries of content, and could also serve to
synthesize the vast research corpus into new formats that could be better used by
non-academic audiences to effect real world systems change.
8
Conclusion: An Emerging International Trend
The Higher Education Sustainability Initiative Sustainable Development Goals
Publishers Compact Fellows have made signiﬁcant strides in aligning the publishing
industry with the United Nations SDGs. This diverse and dedicated group of volun-
teers from various sectors has demonstrated the power of collaboration in driving
sustainable development. Through our weekly meetings, topical working groups,
and active engagement in creating tools and guidance, we have tackled challenges
and capitalized on opportunities to promote sustainable practices within and beyond
the publishing industry.
The Fellows’ interdisciplinary approach and commitment to ‘quick wins’ along-
side systemic changes have been instrumental in fostering a culture of sustainability
across international institutions, education, research, and publishing. Our initiatives,
such as the development of the SDGs Rubric and various top tips, have provided
practical support to stakeholders in implementing SDGs. Additionally, our efforts in
organizing events and series have signiﬁcantly contributed to raising awareness and
structuring public engagement with the SDGs.
Supporting Research and Education Stakeholders in Meeting …
599
The impact of the HESI SDG Publishers Compact Fellows extends to several
key areas. In the realm of research and education, we have bridged the gap between
academic ﬁndings and practical applications, ensuring that sustainability research
is accessible and actionable. In publishing, we have inﬂuenced publishers to adopt
sustainable practices and promote SDG-aligned content. Libraries and academic
institutions have been guided to support the dissemination of sustainable research.
Furthermore, our engagement with practitioners has translated research insights into
tangible solutions for sustainable development.
Looking ahead, the challenge remains to maintain and build on the momentum
generated by the Fellows. Continued collaboration, innovative approaches, and
strategic partnerships will be crucial in advancing the SDGs. The success of the HESI
SDG Publishers Compact Fellows serves as a model for other sectors, demonstrating
the effectiveness of collective action and interdisciplinary cooperation in achieving
global sustainable development goals. Our journey underscores the importance of
shared responsibility and concerted efforts in addressing the world’s most pressing
challenges, setting a path for future initiatives aimed at creating a sustainable and
equitable world.
The Fellows are building a virtual community to share ideas, and lessons learned,
and to continue to develop resources to drive change. We invite readers to visit our
websiteathttps://www.sdgcompactfellows.org/andtosignuptojointhiscommunity.
Acknowledgements We would like to thank Debra Rowe, Ph.D. for leading a group of academics,
publishing and business executives, policymakers, doctoral students, and librarians in this common
endeavor. This chapter is for all those over the past three years who participated in furthering the
initiatives of our Fellows.
References
2023 HESI Global Forum at the 2023 United Nations High-Level Political Forum (2023) https://
sdgs.un.org/HESI/2023GlobalForum
Agbedahin AV (2019) Sustainable development, education for sustainable development, and the
2030 agenda for sustainable development: emergence, efﬁcacy, eminence, and future. Sustain
Dev 27(4):669–680. https://doi.org/10.1002/sd.1931
Alberts B (2022) Why science education is more important than most scientists think. FEBS Lett
596(2):149–159. https://doi.org/10.1002/1873-3468.14272
Arnold R, Wade J (2015) A deﬁnition of systems thinking: a systems approach. Procedia Comput
Sci 44:669–678. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2015.03.050
Ashida A (2022) The role of higher education in achieving the sustainable development goals. In:
Sustainable development goals series, pp 71–84. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-4859-6_5
Association of Learned and Professional Society Publishers (2023) Special interest group: the SDGs
and publishing. https://www.alpsp.org/special-interest-groups/sdgs-and-publishing
Early Decisions Made for REF 2028 (2023) https://www.ukri.org/news/early-decisions-made-for-
ref-2028/#:~:text=A%20new%20approach,maximum%20contributions%20of%20any%20i
ndividuals
Evaluation Reports Steer Away From ‘Automated’ UK Research Assessment (2022) https://www.
ukri.org/news/evaluation-reports-steer-away-from-automated-uk-research-assessment/
600
D. M. Lough et al.
Folan B (2023) Webinar &#8211; Scholarly communication’s response to the climate crisis and the
role of open science. OASPA. https://oaspa.org/webinar-scholarly-communications-response-
to-the-climate-crisis-and-the-role-of-open-science/
Havemann J, Selematsela D, Matizirofa L (n.d.) SDG indicator codes as metadata in institutional
repositories and scholarly indexing systems [Slide show]
Hazlett H (2023) How research assessment reform can help research to do more! Reﬂections from
the SDG Publishers Compact Fellows, Open Climate Campaign, and Open Pharma. DORA.
https://sfdora.org/2023/06/30/how-research-assessment-reform-can-help-research-to-do-more-
reflections-from-the-sdg-publishers-compact-fellows-open-climate-campaign-and-open-pha
rma/
International Publishers Association (2021) Joint statement: the book sector unites to take action
on climate. https://internationalpublishers.org/joint-statement-the-book-sector-unites-to-take-
action-on-climate/
Irfanullah H (2022) SDG publishers compact: where do we stand now?—the scholarly
kitchen. The Scholarly Kitchen. https://scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org/2022/07/28/sdg-publishers-
compact-where-do-we-stand-now/
Irfanullah H (2023) Leadership and accountability matter for a sustainable publishing ecosystem—
the scholarly kitchen. The Scholarly Kitchen. https://scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org/2023/07/25/
leadership-and-accountability-matter-for-a-sustainable-publishing-ecosystem/
Iyengar RN, Kwauk C (2021) Curriculum and learning for climate action. https://doi.org/10.1163/
9789004471818
Jin K (2020) Kaizen promotion in Ethiopia: a role of the government and change of mindset of
people. In: Springer eBooks, pp 89–115. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-0364-1_5
Johnston A, Pickett W (2022) Using DIMPACT to calculate the carbon impact of digital publishing
at Cambridge University Press and Assessment. Learn Publ 35(S1):704–710. https://doi.org/10.
1002/leap.1506
Lough D, Lad N, Ells H, Lubis R (2022) The potential of an SDG rubric in academic publishing and
beyond—the SDG Compact Fellows—SDG Compact Fellows. SDG Compact Fellows. https://
www.sdgcompactfellows.org/videos/v/3yrf8t6j7fwhnwb6m44c5m2x897l93
Lough D (2022) Curriculum and learning for climate action: toward an SDG 4.7 roadmap for
systems change. Leadership Policy Schools 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1080/15700763.2022.215
7739
Martin RL, Kolman M, La Magna D, Deschandelliers Q (2023) Publishing associations and drivers
andbarriersforclimateaction.Logos33(4):19–28.https://doi.org/10.1163/18784712-03104049
Martin R (2023) SDG related research makes up 30% of research output: Health is the most proliﬁc
SDG while Climate Action is the most cited. Sustainable Solutions Summit April 5th, 2023.
https://www.sdgcompactfellows.org/solutions-summit-materials-past
Meschede C (2020) The sustainable development goals in scientiﬁc literature: a bibliometric
overview at the meta-level. Sustainability 12(11):4461. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12114461
Mudditt A (2023) Open science takes people willing to disrupt the system to move it forward—
the ofﬁcial PLOS Blog. The Ofﬁcial PLOS Blog. https://theplosblog.plos.org/2023/06/open-sci
ence-takes-people-willing-to-disrupt-the-system-to-move-it-forward/
Ratings, Rankings and Assessment and SDG Publishers Compact Fellows (2023) Joint task force
on outcomes and impacts report. In: SDG Publishers compact fellows. Higher Education
Sustainability Initiative. https://www.sdgcompactfellows.org/jtfoi-report
Relations with the major groups and other stakeholders|High-Level Political Forum (2023). https://
hlpf.un.org/relations-with-the-major-groups-and-other-stakeholders
SDG Publishers Compact Fellows (2021) Top action tips for graduate researchers and students.
SDG Compact Fellows. https://www.sdgcompactfellows.org/top-action-tips/graduate-resear
chers-and-students
SDG Publishers Compact Fellows (2022a) Communicating implications. https://www.sdgcompac
tfellows.org/communicating-implications
Supporting Research and Education Stakeholders in Meeting …
601
SDG Publishers Compact Fellows (2022b) Purpose, mission, vision. https://www.sdgcompactfe
llows.org/our-mission-and-vision
SDG Publishers Compact Fellows (2022c) Top action tips overview. https://www.sdgcompactfe
llows.org/top-action-tips
SDG Publishers Compact Fellows (2022d) Top action tips: support for all stakeholders [Slide show].
https://sdgs.un.org/HESI
SDG Publishers Compact Fellows (2023a) Academic publishing survey: mapping scholarly
publications related to the sustainable development goals. https://eu.surveymonkey.com/r/D53
S5H7
SDG Publishers Compact Fellows (2023b) Equity. https://www.sdgcompactfellows.org/equity
SDG Publishers Compact Fellows (2023c) Meet the fellows. https://www.sdgcompactfellows.org/
who-are-we-thefellows
SDG Publishers Compact Fellows (2023d) Solutions summit materials—SDG compact fellows.
https://www.sdgcompactfellows.org/solutions-summit-materials-past
SDG Publishers Compact Fellows (2023e) HESI action group annual report 2022. https://www.sdg
compactfellows.org/hesi-action-group
SDG Publishers Compact Fellows (2024a) Improving textbooks and related materials. https://www.
sdgcompactfellows.org/textbooks-educational-materials
SDG Publishers Compact Fellows (2024b) Top action tips for connecting researchers and practi-
tioners. https://www.sdgcompactfellows.org/top-action-tips/connecting-researchers-and-practi
tioners
SDG Publishers Compact, International Publishers Association, and Börsenverein des Deutchen
Buchhandels (2020) Launch of the SDG Publishers Compact: Inviting publishers to make a more
sustainable future [Press release]. https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/wp-content/upl
oads/2020/10/SDG-PublishersCompact_PR-1.pdf
STM Association (2023a) SDG roadmap—STM. STM. https://www.stm-assoc.org/un-sustainable-
development-goals-2/roadmap/
STM Association (2023b4) Action on climate change—STM. STM. https://www.stm-assoc.
org/un-sustainable-development-goals-2/action-on-climate-change/#:~:text=STM%27s%20m
ember%20publishers%20have%20been,address%20the%20global%20climate%20crisis
STM Association (2023c) SDG roadmap home—STM. STM. https://www.stm-assoc.org/sdg-roa
dmap-home/
UN Global Compact (2024) The ten principles. https://unglobalcompact.org/what-is-gc/mission/
principles
UnitedNations(2020)SDGpublisherscompactmembers—unitednationssustainabledevelopment.
United Nations Sustainable Development. https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sdg-pub
lishers-compact-members/
United Nations (2023a) Financing for sustainable development report 2023: ﬁnancing sustainable
transformations. In: Inter-agency task force on ﬁnancing for development. Financing for Sustain-
able Development Ofﬁce of the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs.
https://ﬁnancing.desa.un.org/iatf/report/ﬁnancing-sustainable-development-report-2023
United Nations (2023b) SDG publishers compact—united nations sustainable development. United
Nations Sustainable Development. https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sdg-publishers-
compact/
Watts
J
(2023)
What
happens
if
the
1.5C
target
for
global
heating
is
missed?
The Guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2023/dec/08/what-happens-if-the-
15c-target-for-global-heating-is-missed
Wise J (2021) Climate crisis: over 200 health journals urge world leaders to tackle “catastrophic
harm.” BMJ n2177. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.n2177
Worthington R, Martin RP, Beasley G, Gardner V, Lad N, Lough DM, Patel C (2023) Higher
education sustainability initiative SDG publishers compact fellows. Logos 33(4):45–51. https://
doi.org/10.1163/18784712-03104053
Sustainable Development Agenda 2030
Goals and Early Childhood
Education—A Case Study
of Project-Based Learning in Higher
Education
Niina Väänänen, Hanna Kettunen, Anne Posti, and Virpi Turunen
Abstract Sustainable development is integrated into the Finnish education system
at all levels of education from early childhood to higher education. Early childhood
educators’ study for a bachelor’s degree in higher education in Finland. The studies
comprise many subjects, such as learning and teaching literacy and numeracy, but
also developing, for instance, motor skills or creativity through arts and crafts. Craft
studies are a ﬁve-credit course of the bachelor’s degree. In this case study, future
early childhood teachers were given a project-based learning task to incorporate the
Agenda 2030 goals into their craft project, and to contextualize it to early childhood
learning situations. We are interested in gaining knowledge about how to concretise
learning the Agenda 2030 goals through crafts in early childhood education. The
purpose of this study is to describe and analyse how early childhood teacher students
concretize the Agenda 2030 Goals through crafts in a project-based learning task
and what they learn during the process. We view through their learning portfolios
how the students reﬂect learning through play and their interaction with materials
and crafting methods, in order to understand their connection to their surroundings,
while at the same time, developing their senses, motor skills, creativity, and thinking
skills.
Keywords Early childhood education · Teacher education · Craft education ·
Sustainable development · Agenda 2030 goals
N. Väänänen (B) · H. Kettunen · A. Posti · V. Turunen
Philosophical Faculty, School of Applied Educational Science and Teacher Education, University
of Eastern Finland, P. O. Box 111, 80101 Joensuu, Finland
e-mail: niina.vaananen@uef.ﬁ
H. Kettunen
e-mail: hanna.kettunen@uef.ﬁ
A. Posti
e-mail: anne.posti@uef.ﬁ
V. Turunen
e-mail: virpi.turunen@uef.ﬁ
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_33
603
604
N. Väänänen et al.
1
Introduction
Adults working in early childhood education are teachers (sosionomi in Finnish,
Soziomon in De, Bachelor in social service in Eng), and basic nurses (Opetus-ja
kulttuuriministeriö 2023). The teachers are responsible for pedagogical content and
activities in the actual work in early childhood education. However, ‘socionomes’
tasks are related to socio-pedagogical topics and usually basic nurses look after the
children’s basic care (see also Kettukangas 2013, 2017).
Early childhood teacher education in Finland is achieved at university-level higher
education. The studies are a three-year, 180-credit study programme resulting in a
Bachelor’s degree in Education (Opintopolku n.d.). The studies also give the qual-
iﬁcation to practice as a teacher in early childhood education. This means that
early childhood teachers are responsible for turning the curriculum into action in
their workplaces together with their working teams. The studies for early childhood
education prepare the students with the necessary skills that will be required in their
teaching work. At the University of Eastern Finland, the studies are structured in
ways such as Orientation-, language and communication studies for 15 ECTS, Basic
studies in education (early childhood education; 25 ECTS), Intermediate studies
in education (early childhood education; 40 ECTS), Professional studies in early
childhood education and pre-primary education (75 ETCS), and voluntary studies
of 25 ETCS (UEF n.d.). Early childhood education studies also include 60 ECTS of
pedagogical studies and practical training, research methods, and different topics of
early childhood education, such as literature, language, mathematics, arts, culture,
physical education, and play.
The aim and objective of the study is to describe and analyse how early childhood
teacher students concretize the Agenda 2030 Goals through crafts in a project-based
learning task and what they learn during the process. Next, we will place our study
in the research context of education for sustainability in early childhood education
through crafts. We continue by describing our case study and the process of analysis
in the methods, view the reﬂective process of the participants learning outcomes
in the results and discussion. Finally, we make conclusions of the case study for
education for sustainability in early childhood education.
2
Theoretical Background
2.1
Early Childhood Education
Early childhood education in Finland is arranged, for instance, in early childhood
education and care (ECEC) centres in the public or private sector for children under
school age (the year they turn 7) (Varhaiskasvatuslaki 540/2018 [Early Childhood
Education Act]). Pre-primary education is enforced by the Perusopetuslaki [Basic
Sustainable Development Agenda 2030 Goals and Early Childhood …
605
Education Act] (628/1998) and mandatory for children the year they turn the age at
six years old.
The Finnish National core curriculum for early childhood education and care
(Finnish National Agency of Education, FNAE 2022, pp. 23–24) is based on a
leaning concept that sees children growing, developing, and learning in commu-
nication with other people and the immediate environment. Children are seen as
active learners, who are curious to learn and repeat things. Learning is situated every-
where, and it connects knowledge, skills, actions, emotions, senses, embodied expe-
riences, language and thinking. Learning happens through imitation and play. There
are six generic competencies that early childhood education is geared for: thinking
and learning, cultural skills, communication, and expression, looking after oneself
and everyday skills, multiliteracy, digital competence, participation and inﬂuencing
(p. 26). Figure 1. conceptualizes these themes and generic skills together.
Multiliteracy through makerspace pedagogy, for instance, is seen to enhance
science education in the early years and to create learning opportunities and devel-
oping 21st century skills (Vartainen and Kumpulainen 2019). Vartiainen and Kumpu-
lainen (2019) experimented maker pedagogy with children by making parachutes and
exploring science through play, and this kind of Playful meaning-making has also
been seen as enhancing multiliteracy.
Fig. 1 Early childhood education learning themes and generic skills. Modiﬁed from FNAE (2022,
40, Fig. 1)
606
N. Väänänen et al.
2.2
Early Childhood Craft Education
Craft education connects to all learning themes set by the ECE curriculum (see
Fig. 1.) indirectly and directly. An indirect connection to crafts can be seen in the
curriculum (FNAE 2022) to the theme Language enriched world through learning
language and communication, since communication and learning language is also
part of crafts and could be implemented by story crafting, hence, a method of crafting
or constructing the semiotics of a story (see also Rönkkö and Aerila 2013; Walan
et al. 2020). Me and our community theme is about ethical thinking and learning
about the community’s history, present and past, also through media. The content of
these topics could also involve getting to know history through museum and, often
crafted objects (see also Rönkkö et al. 2016; Vartiainen 2014). Growing, moving,
and developing theme is focused mostly on physical activities, food education, and
learning about health-related issues. In crafts, these can be introduced to the children,
for instance, by using food waste like onion or fruit peels, plants, or coffee grounds
to dye textile materials and later craft these materials into an artefact (see Alanko
2020). Safety is also part this theme and part of the safety education could be, for
instance, understanding how to use sharp tools safely without injuring yourself or
others.
A direct connection to craft education in mentioned in the theme of Diverse forms
of expression, where crafts are part of other art forms (FNAE 2022, pp. 46–48).
Expression through arts is seen to enhance children’s learning abilities, social skills,
and positive self-image. When children explore and interpret while practicing arts,
they develop their abilities to understand and construct the surrounding world through
thinking and learning skills. Crafts are also seen as part of the cultural heritage and
as part of cultural identity. Interaction with various methods, and the manipulation of
materials and aesthetics with instruction are needed to ﬁnd ways to express thoughts,
feelings, observations, and creativity (see also Boyd 2020; Karlson Häikiö 2018).
Considering crafts, according to the curriculum (FNAE 2022, pp. 46–48), design
skills, creative problem solving, ﬁne motor skills, knowledge of structures, materials
and techniques, as well as aspects of design are practiced with the help of technical
craft and textile craft work methods suitable for children. Handmade expression
involves methods like moulding, cutting, nailing, sawing, and sewing. The goal is
to offer children the joy of experimenting, working together, and creating visible
handcrafted pieces. Children explore varied materials, learn craft techniques, and
generate their own ideas. Local craft traditions related to their backgrounds can also
be incorporated.
Another direct connection to crafts education is in the learning theme Exploring
and interacting with my environment. This theme also connects to environmental
education and sustainability. According to the curriculum (FNAE 2022) part of
early childhood education is to give the children possibilities to observe, construct
and understand their surrounding environment, whether it is built or natural. STEM
contents/Environmental/Science and technology education as well as mathematics
are part of this learning theme that is recommended as being learnt through embodied
Sustainable Development Agenda 2030 Goals and Early Childhood …
607
learning and play. This can be done by pointing out how to count trees or rocks in the
play-yard, or by arranging toys in distinct categories (e.g., from smallest to biggest),
or by constructing or crafting (see also Lindfors et al. 2021). Also relevant are things
such as learning about the cycle of the year, learning about plants and animals, and
how to be responsible in the environment they live in (see also Rule and Zhbanova
2012). Environmental education and sustainability are speciﬁcally highlighted in
the early childhood education curriculum. Environmental education includes three
dimensions: learning in the environment, learning about the environment, and acting
for the environment. Especially, local nature and the built environment are seen as
both learning targets and learning environments (FNAE 2022, pp. 46–48). Davies
(2010, pp. 30–31) explains that learning in the environment refers to returning to
nature. Children also need to learn about the environment and learn what can they
do for the environment to develop interconnections, human-nature relationships, and
to increase pro-environmental behaviour (see also Ginsburg and Audley 2020).
According to the curriculum (FNAE 2022) environmental education guides chil-
dren to ﬁnd a quiet place to relax and experience nature aesthetically. Building a
respectful relationship with nature is one of the goals, together with a sustainable
lifestyle,forinstance,bynottrashingnature,responsibleandfrugalbehaviour,energy
efﬁciency, sorting and reducing waste by recycling or maintaining products. It is also
important to learn how to take responsibility for one’s actions and see the results in
such a way that they are not held responsible as children (see also Nussbaum 2011).
The curriculum (FNAE 2022) points out that the goal for technology educa-
tion is to encourage children to explore and experiment with different technological
solutions or materials in their environment by asking questions and seeking results
together with adults. By experimenting with varied materials and hands-on activities
and learning about technology that is familiar to children, such as toys and other
everyday objects/artefacts, children would gain an understanding that all technology
is designed and made by people.
2.3
Finnish Crafts Education
Finnish crafts education has its roots in the 1860’s when education in Finland started
to form on a national level (Marjanen and Metsärinne 2019). The early developer Uno
Cygnaeus (1810–1888) was inspired by the works of Fröbel and Pestalozzi, and their
approach to learning through play (Marjanen and Metsärinne 2019; Kraatari 2016).
Later, Finnish craft education has reﬂected the societal needs of each period (Lepistö
and Lindfors 2015; Porko-Hudd et al. 2018; Kouhia 2021) but has remained a prag-
matic way of learning by doing in the national curriculum. The current curriculum
was changed in 2016 and considers crafts as a multi-material and holistic process
of making crafted objects (Pöllänen 2020; Väänänen and Pöllänen 2021). Multi-
materiality means that in crafts, all kinds of materials can be used with various
techniques to craft without dichotomizing between textile or technical craft. Holistic
craft process means that the person making the product starts the crafting process
608
N. Väänänen et al.
from ideating, designing, experimenting, making, and evaluating the product (see
also Rönkkö 2011; Porko-Hudd et al. 2018). Therefore, the Finnish craft concept
includes the elements of design (visual or technical) in making, although they can
also be seen as separate from each other (see Ihatsu 2002; Nugraha 2012; Shiner
2012).
Yliverronen et al. (2021) describe the holistic craft process with technology and
science education as investigative activities among young children, which can be
separated into modes of action. Everything begins with ideation, and with the help
of the teacher’s questions, discussions, and joint reﬂection about the task at hand
can be realized. The children can carry out investigations or trials of how things
work before making in a holistic process with concrete products. This process is
characterized with playfulness and a child-centred pedagogy, with the assistance of
support techniques acting as scaffolding.
The maker pedagogy in the curriculum is described as non-linear, where learning
is encouraged to shift from the individual to collaborative work in an interdisci-
plinary manner, breaking the boundaries between different school subjects (Härkki
et al. 2023). Furthermore, the craft process itself is non-linear, the end solutions
are unforeseen, as are the process goals, stages or tools needed for the task. Conse-
quently, a lot of ﬂexibility and courage is required from the teacher to follow this type
of pedagogy (Härkki et al. 2023; also, Kangas et al. 2022). Seitamaa-Hakkarainen
and Hakkarainen (2019) compare linear and non-linear pedagogy and see that the
non-linear pedagogy better reﬂects learning skills that respond to the challenges of
this century. This means that, for instance, open and ill-deﬁned design problems are
being resolved in collaboration with others. Even though the task itself may be craft
and design-oriented, the pupils and students are developing their problem-solving
and collaboration skills at the same time. Also, from the viewpoint of sustainability,
ill-deﬁned problems are usually ‘wicked’ and do not necessarily have only one right
answer or a solution to solve them (see also Salonen 2019). With the non-linear
pedagogical approach, this kind of uncertainty can be learned to be coped with.
2.4
Craft in the Finnish ECE
The pedagogy of ﬁve-year-olds and the current implementation of the Diverse forms
of expression learning theme in the curriculum for ECEC (FNEA 2022) have been
evaluated by the National Centre for Assessment of Education in Finland (KARVI)
(Juutinen et al. 2021). This study found that craft was the least implemented of all the
expressive arts content in this theme. In the study, ECE teachers’ self-assessments
of craft implementation received the lowest scores. In addition, ECE craft activities
were not very regular, the equipment available was limited, and the teachers’ skills
were only moderate. The KARVI evaluation pointed to the need to strengthen the role
of expressive arts and the implementation of craft education. It also indicated that
particular attention should be paid to the opportunities for experimentation and explo-
ration through a variety of craft materials and techniques (Juutinen et al. 2021). The
Sustainable Development Agenda 2030 Goals and Early Childhood …
609
results of a study by Karila and Leikola (2022), in which they interviewed teachers
taking part in in-service training in craft and technology education, together with the
KARVI evaluation (Juutinen et al. 2021), show that the content and implementation
of craft and technology education should be strengthened already in the early phases
of childhood teacher training.
2.5
Agenda 2030 Goals and Craft Education
The Agenda 2030 goals offer a detailed framework through which to focus on speciﬁc
and broad topics in a sustainable development context. There are 17 goals with 169
more speciﬁc targets. These goals and targets focus attention on people, the planet,
prosperity, peace, and partnership (UN 2015). Education for sustainability aims to
developskillsandcompetenciessuchascreativity,problem-solving,criticalthinking,
decision making, resilience (Boyd and McLeod 2021; Leal Filho and Pace 2016),
active participation in the communities, as well as understanding and embracing the
complexity of sustainability (Linhares and Cavadas 2021; Bianchi et al. 2022).
An earlier study viewed the Agenda 2030 goals in a Finnish craft context and noted
that all 17 goals can be viewed through crafts and educated through craft education
(Väänänen and Pöllänen 2021). In early childhood education and at elementary level,
this is done, for instance, through material encounters, rehearsing skills and getting
to know the holistic craft process. The material in use could be upcycled and children
could innovate with new uses for them (see also Karlson-Häikiö 2018). Practicing
skills and interaction with materials are seen as crucially important for childhood
development, because this is a sensitive time connecting senses and mental processes
(see also Huotilainen et al. 2018; Pöllänen 2020). The education for sustainability
through arts and crafts has been noticed to be affective way of learning, however,
it needs further examination, especially in the ECE context (Karlson Häikiö 2018;
Boyd and McLeod 2021).
3
Method
The purpose of this study is to view and understand (1) how early childhood educa-
tion teacher students understand the Agenda 2030 goals in their craft project and
(2) what they learn by making a craft-based project for the early childhood educa-
tion context. This case study (Stake 2000; Creswell and Poth 2018) ﬁrst describes
students’ craft projects in an early childhood teacher education context and second
analyses their collective student portfolios. Portfolios are widely used in craft educa-
tion to document and reﬂect on the learning process (Saarinen et al. 2021; Jones
and Shelton 2011). The study module was based on a socio-constructivist view of
co-creation and learning through a project-based learning task (Härkki et al. 2023;
Seitamaa-Hakkarainen and Hakkarainen 2019). This means that the students were
610
N. Väänänen et al.
given an open-ended design and project task within a given framework, along with
some boundaries for their crafting.
3.1
The Case
This study was conducted in an early childhood teacher education university-level
context. The students were attending a course in Early childhood craft education at
the University of Eastern Finland. The course included both theoretical and practical
studies of crafts, including textile and technical working methods and materials
(see also Pöllänen 2020). The theme and course structure had been developed for a
few years before this study. The students ﬁrst learned about the importance of craft
education in early childhood in lectures. Secondly, they practiced the basic skills
needed in craft workshops. The students learned skills such as forming, measuring,
pattern transforming to material, sewing fabrics by hand, felting wool, and printing
textiles in the textile workshops. In the technical workshops they learned how to
measure, clamp pieces safely, saw, sand, drill, joinery, painting as techniques on
wood and plywood, as well as using a cordless drill. The techniques taught in the
workshops gave the students basic skills and knowledge of how to use these hand-
held tools and machines. Also, through making a model-based craft (see Rönkkö
2011; Kröger 2016), as well as making a structure of a wooden toy, they learned
technology through crafts. Another task was to explore and make moving toys such
as a boat sawn from a piece of polyurethane sheet, plywood, cocktail sticks, and a
rubber band.
The third part of the course was ideating, designing, making and evaluating a
craft project. The project was thematised by the teachers to use the UN Agenda 2030
goals as a source of inspiration for their project. Their project work was to concretise
the UN Agenda 2030 goals into a playful toy or game using the crafts skills and
knowledge that they were learning at the same time. The students were introduced
to the goals and had to choose at least one goal to design a toy or a game that could
be used in an early childhood education context.
The students crafted their project in teams of 2–5 persons. The students had two
online design sessions for three hours to ideate and design their project. For the
actual making of the game or toy, they had 18 h (3 × 3 h of technical; and 3 × 3 h of
textile craft). One of the guidelines in the project was to incorporate both methods
and materials in the game or toy. The course’s ﬁnal tasks were to present the project
in an exhibition at the university in such a way that the possible end-users—children
and adults—would be able to play with the toys. They were allowed to keep their
projects for themselves or donate them to an early childhood care unit. The students
also needed to write an academic report with a reﬂection on the early childhood
pedagogy and crafts process. These portfolios were written as a group assignment.
Sustainable Development Agenda 2030 Goals and Early Childhood …
611
3.2
Data and Analysis
We collected data from early childhood teacher students who studied early childhood
education at a university level in December 2023. The students’ participation was
voluntary. The purpose of the study was explained, and we asked for their permis-
sion to use their portfolios as study data. We also asked if the students wanted to
portray their crafting process through photographs taken during the workshops and
exhibition, with the risk of these leading to recognition. Otherwise, the data was
analysed and treated anonymously with the ethical considerations taken into account
throughout the research process.
This study analyses the written project portfolios by ﬁrst describing them, and
then through a process of thematic content analysis (Weber 1990). We received
permissions from 3 group portfolios from 9 students for our analysis. We analysed
the portfolios by carefully reading the written parts and viewing the photographs
from the process, for instance, the plannings and drawings attached to the portfolios.
After reading the texts, the texts were coded with the help of Atlas.ti software, and
the codes categorized into themes. In this analysis, we focused on what the students
were saying rather than seeking for meanings behind their texts (Bengtsson 2016).
4
Results
The student group portfolios revealed several themes of their project-based learning
task. The students entangled the Agenda 2030 Goals and themes from the National
Core Curriculum in their projects, but they were also reﬂecting on their crafting
process from practical and theoretical perspectives. The students also reﬂected on
the gaming and playing perspectives of the project in learning these themes.
The Agenda 2030 Goals were used as a starting point for the crafting project as
an idea with the purpose of concretizing the Goal into an educational task. Overall,
in the course, many of the themes were used as a source of inspiration. Yet, in this
data, there were only two themes that were used for ideation. The themes were Goals
14 Life Below Water (2 groups) and 4 Quality Education (1 group).
Group 1 had three students and their Goal was Life below water. The students
designed a board game that can be used even with the smallest children to ﬁnd
and name ﬁgures of sea life or more simply of colours and shapes. The students
conceptualized the theme of the game as:
The game board, on which we painted the underwater world, the ﬁsh and organisms living
there, offers children the opportunity to see and structure marine life. In the game, the
emphasis is on visualizing and naming different organisms and characters. The game also
reminds children about the protection of water bodies. There is also a piece of garbage on
the game board (a plastic bottle) that does not belong in the sea.
They also considered that through the game the children get to know the life of
water bodies. They also thought that the game could awaken the children’s interest
612
N. Väänänen et al.
in underwater life and increase their knowledge of species and their knowledge
of issues related to the condition and protection of waters. They also considered
that through the game, the children would learn how to follow rules, wait for their
turn in a gaming situation, and other skills for interaction, as well as handling and
regulating emotions. The students reﬂected that the children would learn concrete
conceptualization, hence, naming colours and numbers beside the species. They also
reﬂected that children would learn logical reasoning and problem-solving, as well as
visualization, concentration, and focus.
Group 2 had four students working on Goal 14: Life below water. Their game was
a more traditional ﬁshing game with a ﬁshing rod, ﬁshes, and other water species.
They added plastics in the game to show that plastics do not belong in water to
raise discussions of sorting waste and treating the environment with respect. They
reﬂected on the purpose of the game as:
The ﬁshing game will help the children concretely practice acting responsibly in nature
through play and adopting a sustainable lifestyle at the same time. In addition to the sea
creatures, we made garbage for the ﬁshing game that can also be ﬁshed. The game is easy
to apply with all ages, due to its versatility and adaptability.
Photograph 1
Sea
creature identiﬁcation
game. The game is played by
rolling either one or two
dices and ﬁnding the things
from the board. After you
ﬁnd the right ﬁgure from the
board, you get a textile ﬁgure
from a bag. After all the
ﬁgures are given from form
the bag, the player who has
the most ﬁgures wins. Photo
Väänänen (2023)
Sustainable Development Agenda 2030 Goals and Early Childhood …
613
Photographs 2 and 3
Fishing game. The ﬁshing rods have magnets that pick up the sea creatures
and the trash. For safety reasons (small parts) the game is suitable for children above three years
and only when playing with adults. Photos Väänänen (2023)
The students also connected the game to the content areas of early childhood
education, especially the theme of environmental education. The goal of environ-
mental education is to strengthen children’s relationship with nature, and to guide
them to act responsibly in the environment and towards a sustainable lifestyle.
Group 3 had two students. Goal 4—Quality education—acted as a source of inspi-
ration for this group. The students were concerned with mathematics skills and took
developing mathematical skills as a centre for their project. These students, in fact,
made a set of mathematics education toys and games. One of the toys was ﬁnger
puppets with mathematical and story-based characters, such as the number 5 turning
into a fox or the number 2 reassembling a duck or a swan, as we can see from
Photograph 5. The students had done some background research and found that
paying attention to mathematical ﬁgures or numbers with stories can enhance chil-
dren’s attention to these in theme children’s environments (see also Mattinen and
Hannula-Sormunen 2020). The student’s interpretation of this was then realized into
playful ﬁnger puppets that can help visualise the stories and concepts of numbers.
The numbers can also be arranged from the smallest to the largest or vice versa.
Another way that the students’ embodied learning was with a giant dice that can be
rolled to learn numbers and incorporate some physical activity (see Photograph 4).
The students based this idea on the research of Pönkkö and Sääkslahti (2020) arguing
that physical exercise can help children restore, remember, and concretize abstract
concepts.Thestudentshadalsopreparedawoodenscaleforunderstandingtheweight
of objects, and colourful wooden blocks to understand different geometrical forms.
614
N. Väänänen et al.
Photographs 4 and 5
Learning mathematics through games and stories. Photos Väänänen
(2023)
The analysis revealed that the students described their crafting processes
concretely but also about craft theories. The students were reﬂecting on the craft
project through materials, methods and the processes they were created in. All of
them described their crafting process as a holistic process of ideating, designing,
making and evaluating the project. Their descriptions included how the ideation and
design process proceeded and how the initial plans changed or got more precise
during the process.
We noticed the importance of designing. By making a good plan we were able to keep up
with the schedule. Although we noticed that some of our plans did not work in practice, we
still had time to make changes and come up with another solution. Making things together
and ideating together usually brings up better solutions than just designing on your own.
(Group 2)
The actual making part included descriptions of techniques that they learned
through the products they were making during the workshops. They did admit that
making something for the ﬁrst time created a feeling of nervousness, but the determi-
nation to ﬁnish the task weighted more that giving up. This concept was interpreted
from a range of reﬂections for instance these students felt that:
We should have been more precise in measuring as the components were of slightly varied
sizes. But we managed to sand the pieces to equal size and shape. […] The fear of failing
increases when making things for the ﬁrst time with completely new machinery, and you are
expected to succeed at once. However, failure is one part of the creative problem-solving
process and making mistakes should not be feared. (Group 1).
Another realization from the students was that learning is holistic, and not isolated
into individual subjects. In Group 3’s report that focused on Quality education Goal
4 through mathematics education and play, alongside the tools they made during
Sustainable Development Agenda 2030 Goals and Early Childhood …
615
a craft practice, they also highlighted that crafting offers a learning environment
where the holistic approach to learning can be realized. The following example
nicely conceptualizes most of the students’ reﬂections:
We started to think about craft pedagogy from the perspective of our project so that the
products we made could be used as tools for action-based science education in preschool
and also as a source of ideation and inspiration for joint craft and technology projects. The
scale we made could be used as a tool for learning about weighing, mechanics, strength and
materials, for example. With the children, you could come up with ideas and design your
weighing instrument based on these considerations. (Group 3).
5
Discussion
The purpose of this study was to describe and analyse how early childhood teacher
students concretize the Agenda 2030 Goals through crafts in a project-based learning
task and what they learn during the process. The main results of this study were that
using Agenda 2030 Goals as an inspiration for crafting worked well in gamifying
(FNAE 2022) rather serious themes such as Life below water or Quality Education,
in an early childhood teacher education context. Taking these concepts into practice
in early childhood education is on its way.
First, the students got to know the Goals more precisely through their group
work, and they really had to think about how they could concretize these for the
children they taught. Children cannot be blamed or held responsible for previous
generations’ actions, and they can only be educated for future decisions and actions
(see Nussbaum 2011). Therefore, one of the goals in early childhood education is to
learn about the environment, in the environment or for the environment (FNAE 2022;
also, Davies 2010), which was also noticed by the students. For instance, the students
who chose the Goal Life below water were discussing how they could communicate
the importance of sustaining the largest ecosystem (United Nations n.d.; Linhares
and Cavadas 2021). Integrating plastics that do not belong in the oceans as part of
their ﬁshing or identiﬁcation game could lead to conversations with the children
about what belongs in the waters and what we could do so that they do not end
up in the waters. This also linked to the early childhood education goals of ethical
development of the children (see also FNAE 2022).
Secondly, they learned about basic craft skills and a holistic craft process, which
applies to any project-based learning situation with the advantage of embodied
learning (Härkki et al. 2023; Kröger 2016; Väänänen and Pöllänen 2021). Even
though the students discussed the purpose and beneﬁts of crafts for early childhood
development, they did not discuss how they would realize future craft projects with
the children (Rönkkö and Aerila 2013; Walan et al. 2020). What we as teachers and
researchers can learn from this is to ﬁnd ways of conveying the value of crafting
together more punctually with the children. Although the students did not directly
transfer this project into their practice, they did ‘realize that learning by doing is
important’ (Group 2) and found crafting as an important means of learning. They also
noticed that applying crafts in practice in their future job requires becoming familiar
616
N. Väänänen et al.
with techniques and materials. Hence, ‘learning craft skills and getting assurance
for one’s skills ideation and variation gets easier’ (Group 3). Therefore, the teacher
themselves must be equipped with the necessary skills for their work. We hope that
this course was able to bring them a positive experience and offer them the conﬁdence
to continue crafting in their future jobs with children.
6
Conclusions
The results of the study showed that playing, imagination and stories incorpo-
rated into conceptual learning such as mathematics, linguistics, or semiotics. Hence,
naming, together with tactile and haptic senses, movement, and group activities are
seen to enhance learning (see also Rönkkö and Aerila 2013; Vartiainen and Kumpu-
lainen 2019; Lindfors et al. 2021). This means that crafts education in early childhood
education should be emphasized more to promote creativity in solving problems
(Karlson Häikiö 2018; Boyd 2020). Since there are indications that crafts, espe-
cially technology education, are sometimes neglected in early childhood education
(Juutinen et al. 2021; Karila and Leikola 2022), we need to encourage pre-service
teachers to become familiar with variety of techniques and materials to be comfort-
able to pass these skills in practice. More importantly, learning the method of holistic
crafting process (Rönkkö 2011; Kröger 2016) would broaden students’ conceptions
of crafting, and direct them to discover and use materials and methods innovatively
already in ECE context (see also FNAE 2022). We also conclude that the learning
method, an open-ended learning task approached in co-creation learning process
(Kangas et al. 2022; Härkki et al. 2023), was enhancing the students understanding
about both sustainability (Davies 2010; Boyd and McLeod 2021; Leal Filho and Pace
2016) and crafts education in early childhood context (Karlson Häikiö 2018; Yliver-
ronen et al. 2021). Future research could view teaching practices in early childhood
environments, for instance, by viewing how teachers incorporate crafts and sustain-
ability education in practice. For a sustainable future, we need to be able to imagine,
play with thoughts, design, and try different solutions with a little encouragement,
know the boundaries of the material world, and ﬁnd the best solution to get the job
done, and also look back in reﬂection at what could be done better.
References
Alanko R (2020) Inspiroivaa kestävyyskasvatusta luonnonväriaineiden kautta [Inspiring environ-
mental education through natural dyes]. Tekstiiliopettaja 3(2020):23–25
BengtssonM(2016)Howtoplanandperformaqualitativestudyusingcontentanalysis.NursingPlus
Open 2:8–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.npls.2016.01.001
Bianchi G, Pisiotis U, Cabrera Giraldez M (2022) GreenComp–the european sustainability compe-
tence framework. In: Bacigalupo M, Punie Y (eds) EUR 30955 EN, Publications Ofﬁce of the
Sustainable Development Agenda 2030 Goals and Early Childhood …
617
European Union, Luxembourg. ISBN 978-92-76-46485-3, JRC128040. https://doi.org/10.2760/
13286
Boyd D, McLeod N (2021) Using an arts-based, ﬂexible approach to evaluate students’ intercon-
nected learning of education for sustainability in early childhood. In: Leal Filho W, Lange Salvia
A, Frankerberger F (eds) Teaching sustainable development. Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd., pp
41–59. https://doi.org/10.4337/9781839104657.00010
Boyd D (2020) The legacy café- the holistic beneﬁt of reviving lost arts, crafts and traditional
skills through an early childhood intergenerational sustainable skills project. Education 3–13,
48:2:204–216. https://doi.org/10.1080/03004279.2019.1603247
Creswell JW, Poth CN (2018) Qualitative inquiry and research design: choosing among ﬁve
approaches. Sage, Los Angeles
Davis JM (2010) What is early childhood education for sustainability? In: Davis JM (ed) Young
children and the environment. Cambridge University Press, pp 21–42. https://doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9780511845390.003
Finnish National Agency of Education (2022) Varhaiskasvatuksen opetussuunnitelma [Early
childhood curriculum]. https://www.oph.ﬁ/sites/default/ﬁles/documents/Varhaiskasvatussuunni
telman_perusteet_2022_2.pdf
Ginsburg JL, Audley S (2020) You don’t wanna teach little kids about climate change: beliefs
and barriers to sustainability education in early childhood. Int J Early Childhood Environ Educ
7(3):42–61
Huotilainen M, Rankanen M, Groth C, Seitamaa-Hakkarainen P, Mäkelä M (2018) Why our
brains love arts and crafts: implications of creative practices on psychophysical well-being.
FormAcademisk 11(2):1–18
Härkki T, Seitamaa-Hakkarainen P, Vartiainen H, Saarinen A, Hakkarainen K (2023) Non-linear
maker pedagogy in ﬁnnish craft education. Techne Ser 30(1):1–17. https://doi.org/10.7577/Tec
hneA.4998
Ihatsu AM (2002) Making sense of contemporary American craft. University of Joensuu
Jones M, Shelton M (2011) How portfolios reﬂect constructivism. In: Jones M, Shelton M (eds)
Developing your portfolio-enhancing your learning and showing your stuff: a guide for the early
childhood student or professional. Taylor & Francis, pp 18–27. https://doi.org/10.4324/978020
3835036
Juutinen J et al (2021) Pedagogisia jatkumoita ja ilmaisun iloa, Viisivuotiaiden pedagogiikka ja
taito- ja taidekasvatuksen nykytila varhaiskasvatuksessa [Pedagogical continuity and joy of
expression: ﬁve-year-olds pedagogy and the stat of skill- and art education in early childhood
education]. Kansallinen koulutuksen arviointokeskus. https://karvi.ﬁ/wp-content/uploads/2021/
05/KARVI_9_2021.pdf
Kangas K, Korhonen T, Salo L (2022) Conclusions: the cornerstones and future directions of
invention pedagogy. In: Korhonen T, Kangas K, Salo S (eds) Invention pedagogy—the ﬁnnish
approach to maker education. Routledge, pp 236–244. https://doi.org/10.4324/978100328736
0-20
Karila K, Leikkola S (2022) Varhaisvuosien opettajat käsityö- ja teknologiakasvatuksen osaamis-
taan arvioimassa ja kehittämässä. [Early-years teachers evaluating and developing craft and
technology education competencies]. J Early Childhood Educ Res 11(2):25–47. https://urn.ﬁ/
URN:NBN:ﬁ:tuni-202208026166
Karlson Häikiö T (2018) Art-based projects as cultural tools for promoting sustainability in
preschool and compulsory school. In: Jokela T, Coutts G (eds) Relate north art and desing
for education and sustainability. Lapland University Press, pp 52–79
Kettukangas T (2013) The concept of basic activities in the Finnish early-childhood education
curricula. In: Härkönen U (ed) Reorientation of teacher education towards sustainability through
theory and practice. Proceedings of the 10th international JTEFS/BBCC conference Sustainable
development. Culture. Education. University of Eastern Finland, pp 55–64. http://urn.ﬁ/URN:
ISBN:978-952-61-1112-4
618
N. Väänänen et al.
Kouhia A (2021) From essential skill to productive capital: Perspectives on policies and practices
of craft education in Finland. In: Wood D (ed) Craft is political. Bloomsbury visual arts, pp
212–224. https://doi.org/10.5040/9781350122291.0022
Kraatari E (2016) Domestic dexterity and cultural policy: the idea of cottage industry and historical
experience in Finland from the great famine to the reconstruction period. University of Jyväskylä,
Jyväskylä. https://doi.org/10.17409/kpt.64190
Kröger T (2016) Diverse orientations in craft education: student teachers’ conceptions and
perceptions. Techne Ser 23(1):1–14
Leal Filho W, Pace P (2016) Teaching education for sustainable development: implications on
learning programmes at higher education. In: Leal Filho W, Pace P (eds) Teaching education
for sustainable development at university level. Springer International Publishing Switzerland,
pp 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-32928-4_1
Lepistö J, Lindfors E (2015) From gender-segregated subjects to multi-material craft: student
teachers’ views on the future of craft subject. FormAkademisk 8:1–20. https://doi.org/10.7577/
formakademisk.1313
Lindfors E, Rönkkö ML, Kiviranta L, Yliverronen V, Tanhuanpää S, Grönman S (2021) Outdoor
learning in early childhood education: a narrative review. Techne Ser A 28(2):156–165
Linhares E, Cavadas B (2021) Bad plastics—oceans free of plastic: the role of education. In: Leal
Filho W, Lange Salvia A, Frankerberger F (eds) Teaching sustainable development. Edward
Elgar Publishing Ltd., pp 62–74. https://doi.org/10.4337/9781839104657.00011
Marjanen P, Metsärinne M (2019) The development of craft education in ﬁnnish schools. Nordic J
Educ History 6(1):49–70. https://doi.org/10.36368/njedh.v6i1.124
Mattinen A, Hannula-Sormunen M (2020) Lapsen matemaattinen maailma ja ajattelu. [Mathemat-
ical world and thinking of a child.] In: Hujala E, Turja L (eds) Varhaiskasvatuksen käsikirja
[Handbook of Early childhood education]. PS Kustannus, pp 221–235
Nugraha A (2012) Transforming tradition: a method for maintaining tradition in a craft and design
context. Aalto University, Helsinki
Nussbaum M (2011) Creating capabilities—human development approach. UP. https://doi.org/10.
4159/harvard.9780674061200
Opetus-ja kulttuuriministeriö (2023) Uusi varhaiskasvatuslaki [New early childhood act]. https://
okm.ﬁ/uusivarhaiskasvatuslaki
Opintopolku (n.d.) Varhaiskasvatuksen opettaja, kandidaatti (3 v) [Early childhood teacher,
Bachelor (3years)]. https://opintopolku.ﬁ/konfo/en/koulutus/1.2.246.562.13.000000000000000
02975
Perusopetuslaki 628/1998 [Basic Education Act] https://www.ﬁnlex.ﬁ/ﬁ/laki/ajantasa/1998/199
80628
Pöllänen SH (2020) Perspectives on multi-material craft in basic education. Int J Art Des Educ
39(1):255–270. https://doi.org/10.4159/harvard.9780674061200
Pönkkö A, Sääkslahti A (2020) Liikkuva lapsi. [Moving child] In: Hujala E, Turja L (eds)
Varhaiskasvatuksen käsikirja [Handbook of Early childhood education]. PS- Kustannus, pp
136–149
Porko-Hudd M, Pöllänen S, Lindfors E (2018) Common and holistic crafts education in Finland.
Techne Ser A 25(3):26–38
Rönkkö ML, Aerila JA, Grönman S (2016) Creative inspiration for preschoolers from museums.
IJEC 48:17–32. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13158-016-0159-z
Rönkkö ML, Aerila JA (2013) Semiotic working process as a basis for children´s craft process: An
experiment in Finnish pre-school group. In: Härkönen U (ed) Reorientation of teacher education
towards sustainability through theory and practice. In: Proceedings of the 10th international
JTEFS/BBCC conference Sustainable development. Culture. Education. University of Eastern
Finland, pp 291–306. http://urn.ﬁ/URN:ISBN:978-952-61-1112-4
Rönkkö ML (2011) Käsityön monet merkitykset. Opettajankoulutuksen opiskelijoiden käsitöille
antamat merkitykset ja niiden huomioon ottaminen käsityönopetuksessa. [Multiple meanings
Sustainable Development Agenda 2030 Goals and Early Childhood …
619
of craft. Teacher education students’ meanings and their consideration in craft education.] Turun
yliopisto, Turku. http://www.doria.ﬁ/handle/10024/70770
Rule AC, Zhbanova KS (2012) Changing perceptions of unpopular animals through facts, poetry,
crafts, and puppet plays. Early Childhood Educ J 40:223–230. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10643-
012-0520-2
Saarinen A, Seitamaa-Hakkarainen P, Hakkarainen K (2021) Long-term use of ePortfolios in craft
education among elementary school students: reﬂecting the level and type of craft learning
activities. Des Technol Educ 26(1):2–28. https://ojs.lboro.ac.uk/DATE/article/view/2911
Salonen AO (2019) Transformative responses to sustainability. In: Leal Filho W (ed) Encyclo-
pedia of sustainability in higher education. Springer, pp 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-63951-2_501-1
Seitamaa-HakkarainenP,Hakkarainen,K(2019)Koulukeksivänäyhteisönä.[Schoolasaninventive
community] In: Tossavainen T, Löytönen M (eds) Sähköistyvä koulu. Oppiminen ja oppimate-
riaalit muuttuvassa tietoympäristössä. [Electrifying school. Learning and learning materials in
changing knowledge environment.] Suomen tietokirjailijat ry, pp 79–97
Shiner L (2012) Blurred Boundaries”? rethinking the concept of craft and its relation to art and
design. Philos Compass 7(4):230–244. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1747-9991.2012.00479.x
Stake RE (2000) Case study. In: Denzin NK, Lincoln YS (eds) Handbook of qualitative research
sage, pp 435–454
UEF (n.d.) Degree Programme in Early Childhood Teacher Education 2023–2024. https://opas.
peppi.uef.ﬁ/en/programme/118865?period=2023-2024
United Nations (n.d.) Goal 14. https://sdgs.un.org/goals/goal14 [11.12.2023]
United Nations (UN) (2015) Transforming our world: the 2030 agenda for sustainable development.
New York: United Nations
Väänänen N, Pöllänen S (2021) Sustainability in Finnish craft education: United Nations Sustainable
Development Goals of the 2030. In: Leal Filho W, Salvia AL, Frankenberger F (eds) Teaching
sustainable development. Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd., pp 121–132. https://doi.org/10.4337/
9781839104657.00015
Varhaiskasvatuslaki 540/2018 [Act of Early Childhood Education]. https://www.ﬁnlex.ﬁ/ﬁ/laki/
alkup/2018/20180540
Vartiainen H (2014) Principles for design—oriented pedagogy for learning from and with museum
objects. Joensuu: University of Eastern Finland
Vartiainen J, Kumpulainen K (2019) Makerspaces, multiliteracies and early science education: the
ﬁnnish approach. In: Blum-Ross A, Kumpulainen K, Marsh J, (eds) Enhancing digital literacy
and creativity: makerspaces in the early years. Taylor & Francis Group, pp 38–52. https://doi.
org/10.4324/9780429243264-4
Walan S, Flognman J, Kilbrink N (2020) Building with focus on stability and construction: using
a story as inspiration when teaching technology and design in preschool. Education 3–13.
48(2):174–90. https://doi.org/10.1080/03004279.2019.1601751
Weber R (1990) Basic content analysis. SAGE Publications, Los Angeles. https://doi.org/10.4135/
9781412983488
Yliverronen V, Kangas K, Rönkkö ML (2021) Investigative activities as a basis for integrating
pre-primary craft, technology and science education. Techne Series A 28(2):173–180
Promoting Renewable Energy Research
in Brazilian Higher Education
Institutions: A Vision Aligned
with Sustainable Development Goals
Luana de Aguiar Vieira, Henrique de Souza Medeiros,
Ana Regina de Aguiar Dutra, Anelise Leal Vieira Cubas, Robert Birch,
and José Baltazar Salgueirinho Osório de Andrade Guerra
Abstract Initiatives to promote the integration of research in renewable energies in
Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) in Brazil are crucial steps toward building an
ecosystem capable of contributing to the sustainability and economic development
of the country. HEIs can play a crucial role in advancing society towards sustain-
able development with their fundamental pillars, structured in teaching, research,
extension, leadership, and innovation activities. Therefore, education emerges as a
positive inﬂuence on energy policies, highlighting the importance of educational
investments as an essential part of the strategy to promote sustainable development.
In this sense, this article seeks to provide an overview of the actions adopted, both
directly and indirectly, by HEIs in many countries that promote the study and applica-
tion of renewable energies on their campuses, academic communities, and so forth.
The article also highlights actions and policies that have shown good results and/
or need to be implemented to advance sustainable goals. Examples from two HEIs
located in the Brazilian state of Santa Catarina, show how their actions and strategies
L. de Aguiar Vieira · H. de Souza Medeiros
Católica University Center of Santa Catarina, Jaraguá Do Sul, Brazil
e-mail: lavieira@catolicasc.org.br
H. de Souza Medeiros
e-mail: henrique.medeiros@catolicasc.org.br
A. R. de Aguiar Dutra (B) · A. L. V. Cubas · J. B. S. O. de Andrade Guerra
Graduate Program in Administration, Center for Sustainable Development Research, University
of Southern Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, Brazil
e-mail: ana.aguiar@animaeducacao.com.br
A. L. V. Cubas
e-mail: anelise.cubas@animaeducacao.com.b
J. B. S. O. de Andrade Guerra
e-mail: jose.baltazarguerra@animaeducacao.com.br
R. Birch
School of Engineering, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, England
e-mail: robsb@cybase.co.uk
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_34
621
622
L. de Aguiar Vieira et al.
aligned with the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and foster
regional development by creating jobs and attracting investments. Moreover, this
creates opportunities for entrepreneurship and innovation while positioning the HEI
as a signiﬁcant player in this area.
Keywords Renewable energy · Research · Higher Education Institution (HEI) ·
SDG · Sustainable development
1
Introduction
The concept of sustainable development has increasingly captured the attention of
the academic community and professionals, a trend signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by the
publication of the Brundtland Report by the United Nations World Commission on
EnvironmentandDevelopmentin1987(Brundtland1987).Thisseminalreport,high-
lighting the interdependence of economic, social, and environmental sustainability,
has played a pivotal role in shaping the contemporary understanding of sustainable
development. It posits that sustainable development meets the needs of the present
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs,
laying the groundwork for the widespread adoption and integration of sustainability
principles across various sectors (Wasiluk 2013).
Climate change has demanded technological innovations and forms of manage-
ment to solve complex problems related mainly to environmental impacts. According
to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC 2022) on environmental impacts, the world is expected to reach the peak
of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in 2025, considering the growth of industrial
activities and exponential increase in the world’s population. In this sense, the Inter-
governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC 2022) states that, in order to reverse
this reality, decision-makers from governments, civil society, and the private sector
must act for the planet and take sustainable actions to mitigate the negative effects
on the environment and reduce GHG emissions urgently.
The study by Zhang et al. (2018) explores the determinants inﬂuencing the formu-
lation of renewable energy and energy efﬁciency policies across a broad array of
countries. Their analysis reveals a positive correlation between factors such as educa-
tion level, the extent of globalization policies, and domestic credit availability, and
the enactment of comprehensive energy policies. In contrast, the abundance of per
capita oil reserves is found to negatively affect the adoption of renewable energy
policies. Notably, the study underscores the signiﬁcant role of globalization policies
in promoting both renewable energy and energy efﬁciency initiatives. The ﬁndings
suggest that countries’ active participation in international political organizations
plays a pivotal role in creating an enabling environment for the progression of
energy policies. Zhang et al. (2018) conclude that deeper engagement with inter-
national bodies can provide strategic avenues for governments to advance future
energy policy initiatives.
Promoting Renewable Energy Research in Brazilian Higher Education …
623
Public policies play a key role in establishing guidelines and strategies to achieve
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), with emphasis on collective and indi-
vidual actions towards global sustainability, encouraging practices and measures
that aim to reduce the impacts of climate change. In this context, the transition to
renewable energy sources is urgent and requires not only signiﬁcant investments in
infrastructure, but also the contribution of Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) to
the transformation of society through their research groups and infrastructures for the
generation of knowledge. In their role as a trainer of professionals to potentially work
in different areas aligned with sustainability, such as renewable energies, and energy
efﬁciency, HEIs are able to meet the collective challenge of building the collaboration
between different sectors of society, i.e., between government, industry, academia,
and the community at large.
The study carried out by Leal Filho et al. (2019) investigates the engagement of
50 higher education institutions worldwide in energy efﬁciency measures and their
use of renewable energy sources. The ﬁndings reveal a modest reliance on renewable
energy across the majority of these institutions, with 1–20% of their energy consump-
tion being derived from renewable sources, predominantly solar/photovoltaic energy,
which accounts for about 70% of this share. Furthermore, approximately 54% of
the surveyed universities demonstrated a signiﬁcant commitment to transitioning
towards renewable energy, especially within their buildings (78%) and equipment/
machinery (56%). This research underscores the imperative of sustainable energy
use on campuses striving for sustainability, highlighting gaps in the current energy
initiatives of HEIs. Leal Filho et al. (2019) emphasize the need for enhanced commit-
ment and more comprehensive strategies in the adoption of renewable energy within
the academic sector.
HEIs are recognized as key catalysts for advancements in energy and sustain-
ability policies. Their mandate extends beyond the mere education of professionals;
there exists an imperative for HEIs to actively engage in research and development
aimed at the practical implementation of innovative energy solutions within their own
infrastructure. This dual approach not only reinforces the commitment of academic
institutions to sustainability but also serves as a living laboratory for sustainable prac-
tices. The research by Zhang et al. (2018) further elucidates the instrumental role of
education in bolstering energy policies. It demonstrates that enhancements in educa-
tional outcomes can indirectly foster a conducive environment for the evolution and
adoption of robust energy policies. This insight suggests that increased investments
in education by countries can serve as a strategic mechanism to indirectly support
the future development and reﬁnement of energy policies. In this context, the article
discusses the correlation between HEIs, SDGs, carbon emissions, and renewable
energies, highlighting the role of HEIs on these issues and presenting successful
actions and some case studies.
624
L. de Aguiar Vieira et al.
2
Theoretical Background
In the theoretical framework of this study, we will systematically explore the intricate
connections between HEIs and theSDGs, focusing on their pivotal role in addressing
carbon emissions and advancing the use of renewable energies. This examination
seeks to elucidate the critical contributions of HEIs in fostering sustainability, high-
lighting how they can act as catalysts for change by integrating sustainable practices
into their operations, research, and educational mandates. The framework will draw
upon existing literature and theoretical models to analyze the potential of HEIs to
inﬂuence and drive progress towards achieving global sustainability targets, thereby
underscoring the signiﬁcance of academic institutions in the global sustainability
agenda.
2.1
Higher Education Institutions and the Sustainable
Development Goals
Contemporary society’s approach to natural resources—as mere sources of raw mate-
rials and waste repositories—has precipitated environmental degradation that now
represents a civilizational crisis, jeopardizing the sustainability of life on Earth (Leff
2006). In response to this dire situation, the international community has proposed
various strategies to mitigate such impacts, among which the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development stands out prominently. Unveiled at the United Nations
Summit on Sustainable Development in 2015, this agenda delineates a comprehen-
sive plan of action to be pursued over the ensuing decade, aiming to address and
rectify these environmental challenges (UNSDN 2017).
The pursuit of SDGs encapsulated in the 2030 Agenda extends across all societal
strata, with HEIs playing a crucial role. These institutions are actively exploring
and implementing initiatives geared towards the SDGs’ realization, reﬂecting on
their pivotal social responsibility. The discourse on how universities and the scien-
tiﬁc community can effectively contribute to achieving these SDGs is increasingly
becoming a focal point of academic inquiry and action (Buckeridge and Philippi Jr
2020).
HEIs have their structural pillars based in teaching, research, extension, lead-
ership, and innovation which are a fundamental part of driving society’s progress
towards sustainable development (Ribeiro et al. 2021; Seraﬁm and Leite 2021).
According to Zhang et al. (2018), education is one of the most important prac-
tices capable of exerting a positive inﬂuence and, consequently, improvements on
energy policies. These authors also highlight the importance of countries considering
investments in education as a mandatory item in the strategy to promote sustainable
development. More than this, the results of the same study indicate that the training
given by academics in a HEI, which only results in the improvement of the economic
position of the individual, implies that the growth of gross domestic product (GDP)
Promoting Renewable Energy Research in Brazilian Higher Education …
625
per capita does not automatically present a strong correlation with the improve-
ment of actions that can foster sustainable development in a region. In other words,
socioeconomic development alone is not enough to ensure behaviour in line with
sustainable practices.
In this context, the universities are identiﬁed as vital centers for knowledge gener-
ation and dissemination, where the interplay among research, teaching, and commu-
nity engagement is foundational to the cultivation of comprehensive strategies for
sustainability. These institutions are uniquely positioned to lead by example in the
implementation of concrete actions toward achieving the SDGs. Central to their
mission is the imperative to prioritize educational excellence, equipping students
not only with the knowledge but also with the critical skills and motivation needed
to engage with and contribute to the SDGs. This approach aligns with the aims of
‘education for sustainable development’ (SDG 4), advocating for an educational
paradigm that integrates sustainability principles across all learning and teaching
activities (Kestin et al. 2017).
2.2
Higher Education Institutions and Carbon Emissions
Barron et al. (2021) point out that the commitment to carbon neutrality is one of the
clearest strategies adopted by world leaders to tackle the climate crisis. As of 2020, at
least 25 national governments and the European Union have committed to achieving
net carbon neutrality by 2050. These individual commitments can help align global
emissions to a pathway that can keep global temperature rise well below 2 °C, as
envisioned in the Paris Agreement.
Abdullah and Muhammad (2023) underscore the inadequacy of current govern-
mental policies in curbing the adverse impacts of human activities on the climate
system. Against this backdrop, the research highlights the pivotal role of non-state
actors, including both non-proﬁt and for-proﬁt organizations, in championing climate
action and signiﬁcantly contributing to the reduction of carbon emissions. These
entities have been instrumental in introducing innovative decarbonization strategies,
signaling a commitment to transitioning towards a low or zero-carbon economy.
Practices such as the adoption of internal carbon pricing, procurement of electricity
from renewable sources, pledges towards carbon neutrality, and the setting of ambi-
tious climate mitigation goals aligned with limiting global temperature rise to below
2 °C, exemplify their proactive engagement in addressing climate challenges. This
body of work by Abdullah and Muhammad (2023) illuminates the critical contri-
bution of the non-state sector in advancing effective climate solutions, challenging
policymakers to recognize and support these initiatives in the broader framework of
climate governance.
Regarding the actions of HEIs as an active agent in the reduction of carbon emis-
sions, for example, in 2006 leaders of several HEIs in the USA joined at the forefront
of the Climate Commitment of the Presidents of American Colleges and Universities
organisation; a movement which was brought together to develop goals and plans
626
L. de Aguiar Vieira et al.
to achieve carbon neutrality “as soon as possible”. These early commitments to the
ambitious goal of carbon neutrality make this sector unique in the USA. As a way
to make it more agile and economically viable, the strategy of establishing, ﬁrst, a
chain of suppliers that adopt practices to reduce carbon emissions was highlighted.
A second strategy was the adoption of greener campuses, aiming at sequestering a
carbon equivalence to their emissions and ultimately seeking to achieve net carbon
neutrality. This strategy reﬂects a balance between the need for continuous oper-
ations and environmental responsibility, although there is much discussion about
the effectiveness of this approach, since decarbonization has not yet been achieved
(IPCC 2018; Barron et al. 2021).
As outlined in a study conducted by Wiryadinata et al. (2019), emissions inherent
to renewable energy systems throughout their life cycle primarily stem from the
construction, transportation, and decommissioning phases, intrinsically linked to
the use of fossil fuel-powered equipment. Emissions over the life cycle of these
renewable systems prove advantageous compared to fossil systems, ranging from a
40% variation in the highest emissions to 1% in the lowest, potentially reaching up
to 975 gCO2/kWh. Among the various renewable systems analyzed, it is noteworthy
that biomass power plants require signiﬁcantly more land area per megawatt (MW)
capacity while also contributing to the creation of the largest job contingent. This
phenomenon is attributed to biomass-related activities such as raw material collection
and transportation, plant operation, and product disposal. It is worth highlighting that
when biomass residues are used as raw materials, a biomass power plant can exhibit
a carbon sequestration effect, resulting in net negative emissions over the life cycle.
This perspective underscores the complexity and varied ramiﬁcations associated
with different renewable systems, not only in environmental contexts but also in
socio-economic dimensions.
In this context, these same authors argue that the implementation of an infrastruc-
ture based on renewable energies in its different forms (solar, photovoltaic, wind,
etc.) can contribute substantially to reducing greenhouse gas emissions by HEIs.
According to Dyer and Dyer (2017), by adopting an approach to promote sustainable
practices, HEIs can play a vital role in the successful implementation of renewable
energy strategies around the world.
2.3
Higher Education Institutions and Renewable Energies
In order to address the contemporary climate challenges caused by global warming,
there is a growing emphasis on the search for renewable energies and technologies
aimed at minimizing environmental impacts. A signiﬁcant example of this move-
ment can be found in the automotive sector, which has dedicated notable efforts to
replacing combustion engine vehicles with electric models (Arangues et al. 2022).
In Brazil, for example, the transportation sector emerges as the main source of CO2
emissions, being responsible for 210.4 million tons of carbon dioxide equivalent
(MTCO2e) in 2022 (Brasil 2023). This shift in focus highlights the urgency of
Promoting Renewable Energy Research in Brazilian Higher Education …
627
addressing GHG emissions and the need for transitions to more sustainable and
eco-conscious technologies.
Approximately 70% of the planet’s CO2 emissions come from oil or coal ﬁred
power plants and the transport sector (United Nation 2021; Zheng and Peng,
2021; IPCC 2022). This establishes a direct connection between the commitment
to preserving the climate and the need to carry out a comprehensive and rapid
transformation of the energy production system, directing it towards scalable and
emission-free sources such as solar, wind and nuclear energy (Yates 2018). This
move highlights the crucial importance of adopting more sustainable and environ-
mentally friendly energy sources, reinforcing the urgency of an effective transition
to mitigate the adverse impacts of GHG emissions.
According to the Global Wind Energy Council (GWEC 2023), the COVID-19
Pandemic and the current situation of the conﬂict between Russia and Ukraine
triggered a prolonged period of high energy prices on a global scale. This shows
that we are facing a signiﬁcant energy crisis, the result of a late transition between
energy production and capture technologies, leaving energy markets susceptible to
and dependent on fossil fuels. In response to this crisis, governments around the
world have been implementing measures to accelerate this transition, setting ambi-
tious targets for the phase-out of technologies based on non-renewable fuels and
prioritizing clean generation in both industry and transport. However, Bosman and
Chelberg (2019) point out that the development and promotion of renewable energy
technologies are inseparable from public support and talent training.
Currently, the absence of qualiﬁed professionals with innovative awareness and
skills in technologies for Renewable Energy Sources (RES) represents a consider-
able obstacle to its promotion (Lucas et al. 2018; Ciriminna et al. 2023). Education
emerges as an effective means to foster public awareness and achieve higher levels
of professionalism in this ﬁeld (Afkar et al. 2019; Lee et al. 2013). While research
indicates that most peoplehaveabasicunderstandingof theenergycrisis andenviron-
mental pollution, it is crucial to strengthen the sensitivity of this awareness through
educational initiatives. Therefore, improving people’s awareness through education
represents an effective strategy to overcome barriers related to the promotion and
innovative application of RES (Guven and Sulun 2017). The incorporation of educa-
tional programs that emphasize the importance of renewable energies and stimulate
innovation in the sector emerges as a fundamental element in the formation of a
solid base of conscious and qualiﬁed professionals. This approach will not only
assist in overcoming today’s challenges but also pave the way for a sustainable and
energy-efﬁcient future.
Renewable energy is deﬁned as energy derived from natural processes that are
continuously replenished or possess the ability to regenerate within a human lifespan.
This category includes a diverse array of sources such as solar, wind, biomass,
geothermal, hydroelectric, tidal, and biofuels, which are considered inexhaustible
due to their sustainable regeneration capabilities (Scholten and Bosman 2013). Rocha
(2024) further reﬁnes this deﬁnition by characterizing renewable energy as stemming
from natural resources that can be utilized at levels sustainable for production and
consumption, thereby maintaining a balanced cycle without depleting the source.
628
L. de Aguiar Vieira et al.
These sources, predominantly non-fossil based, align with the principles of sustain-
able development by supporting a harmonious relationship between energy usage
and natural regeneration. However, as Dunlap (2015) notes, while renewable energy
contributes to sustainability by leveraging environmentally friendly processes, it is
not inherently synonymous with ‘clean energy.’ The distinction lies in the envi-
ronmental impacts associated with the production and use of these energy forms,
emphasizing the need for a nuanced understanding of renewable energy’s role in
fostering a sustainable future.
Fundamentally, since the 1970s, HEIs in several countries have promoted educa-
tional programs with certain levels of content and actions that emphasise renewable
energies in their curriculum matrices (Ehrlich and Geller 2017). However, Wang and
Guo (2021) believe that a review of the teaching process seems necessary to have a
more effective training in the promotion of RES and proposes that it be carried out
based on three pillars: design, teaching, and evaluation process.
HEIs deal with renewable energies mainly in their Graduate Programs in an envi-
ronment where in-depth research projects take place with students and professors
specialized in the subject. However, because of the interdisciplinary nature of the
subject, content with different approaches and objectives on renewable energies
can be incorporated into academic programs that exist already at the undergraduate
level. This can have a very signiﬁcant effect on the individual student’s continuity in
specializing in areas of knowledge related to renewable energies. HEIs around the
world already adopt approaches that involve renewable energies in their undergrad-
uate courses at various levels of teaching, research (scientiﬁc initiation and course
completion work), and extension.
3
Renewable Energy Research on Brazilian Higher
Education Institutions
In Brazil, many HEIs, through their research groups and Graduate Programs, have
dedicated themselves to research on the theme of renewable energies as a way to
contribute to energy efﬁciency and the reduction of GHG emissions. Avila et al.
(2019) highlighted measures to make climate change more present in research and
university teaching. To further corroborate, Matana Júnior et al. (2023), researchers
from the University of Passo Fundo/Brazil, reported that Brazilian HEIs, listed in
the UI GreenMetric 2020 Ranking, commonly adopt sustainable practices related
to lighting and renovation of air conditioning systems to ensure energy efﬁciency.
As for renewable energy generation, solar photovoltaic (PV) is the most common
practice used by HEIs. Moura-Leite et al. (2023) studied the Brazilian federal univer-
sities regarding compliance with the Sustainable Logistics Management Plan that is
mandatory for public agencies, where electricity was the most addressed topic in the
reports on these HEIs.
Promoting Renewable Energy Research in Brazilian Higher Education …
629
3.1
Case 1: Catholic University Center of Santa Catarina/
PUCSC and Its Research on Renewable Energies
In the State of Santa Catarina, there are also mobilizations of HEIs towards studies
on renewable energies. The ﬁrst example comes from the Catholic University Centre
of Santa Catarina/PUCSC, located in Jaraguá do Sul, Santa Catarina. Content with
an emphasis on renewable energies is already part of the curriculum of the Electrical
Engineering and Mechanical Engineering courses where both theoretical and prac-
tical aspects are covered. The city of Jaraguá do Sul is the cradle of a multinational
industry that manufactures components and carries out the assembly, installation and
activation of PV and wind energy plants around the world. This provides incentive
for students and researchers to study in this ﬁeld of renewable energies. Developing
the relationship with this sector is fundamental for renewable energies to gain more
and more space in the curricular matrices of HEIs and research groups.
Catholic University Centre of Santa Catarina/PUCSC has a research group, called
SUSTENTARE, which is fundamentally based on renewable energies distributed in
lines such as: sustainable materials, energy efﬁciency, wind energy and photovoltaic
solar energy, and has a laboratory equipped with PV panels, a wind turbine, with its
control systems, and a wind tunnel. After strengthening joint actions between the
institution’s management and researchers, it was possible to identify gains in the
integral training of students, whether to work in the job market or to participate in
research groups and to enter Graduate Programs to study for a higher degree.
3.2
Case 2: University of Southern Santa Catarina (Unisul)
and Its Research on Renewable Energies
Also noteworthy in Santa Catarina is the University of Southern Santa Catarina
(Unisul), which promotes, within the scope of its research groups and Graduate
Programs, cutting-edge actions and research in the context of renewable energies. In
2015, the German-led 4-year REGSA Project (Electricity Generation from Renew-
able Sources in Latin America) sought to increase the share of renewable energy
production in Bolivia, Brazil, and Chile. This Unisul project, which was conducted
by its Centre for Sustainable Development (GREENS), was linked to the Graduate
Program in Administration and provided the installation of PV panels in a school
located in a remote rural area that became the ﬁrst solar school in Brazil (Berchin
et al. 2015). In 2016, in conjunction with the Energy Efﬁciency Program of the Santa
Catarina Power Plants, Unisul replaced more than 1000 ﬂuorescent lamps with LED
and installed PV panels for the generation of clean energy.
These examples demonstrate the role of HEIs in the direction of their studies
and practices related to renewable energies, through teaching at its different levels
(undergraduate, lato and stricto sensu), extension and through its research groups
630
L. de Aguiar Vieira et al.
whose aims are to mitigate the effects of GHG emissions and are aligned with the
SDGs, especially SDGs 7 and 13.
4
Conclusions
There is a challenge in ﬁnding qualiﬁed human resources to progress the specialised
ﬁeld of sustainable development. Clearly, HEIs can play a crucial role in advancing
society towards sustainable development with their fundamental pillars, structured in
teaching, research, extension, leadership, and innovation activities. Therefore, educa-
tion emerges as a positive inﬂuence on energy policies, highlighting the importance
of educational investments as an essential part of the strategy to promote sustainable
development. However, it is essential to emphasize that the strengthening of HEIs
should not be limited to economic improvements but should be intrinsically linked
to the promotion of practices that drive local and global sustainable development.
In promoting sustainable practices, HEIs play a vital role in the successful imple-
mentation of renewable energy strategies around the world. A review of the teaching
process, focusing on the pillars of design, teaching, and evaluation, reveals the need
for more effective training in the promotion of renewable energy. The inclusion of
content on renewable energies in undergraduate and graduate courses, as well as the
promotion of practical approaches, are essential to the training of professionals who
are aware and prepared to face the challenges of climate change, particularly those
derived from GHG emissions resulting from energy inefﬁciency.
Finally, HEIs also play a multifaceted and strategic role in promoting sustainable
practices and advancing RES. By integrating content, practices, and partnerships with
the industrial sector, these institutions not only prepare professionals for current
challenges, but also contribute signiﬁcantly to building a sustainable and energy-
efﬁcient future. Continuous commitment to innovation, research, and education is
essential to consolidate the role of HEIs as catalysts for sustainable development on
a global scale.
Therefore, it’s possible to designing an agenda for future sustainability goals based
on Renewable Energy in HEIs by the following proposed points:
(i) Establishing research groups with adequate infrastructure and specialized
professors in the ﬁeld,
(ii) Collaboration between different departments such as Engineering, Business
Administration, Law, and others,
(iii) Forming partnerships with industries of the region to drive and support research
projects and internships, and
(iv) Developing education and awareness programs for the academic community
and society.
Acknowledgements We gratefully acknowledge the contributions of several institutions in the
successful completion of this study. The research was carried out by the Centre for Sustainable
Promoting Renewable Energy Research in Brazilian Higher Education …
631
Development (Greens) in collaboration with the Graduate Program in Administration at the Univer-
sityofSouthernSantaCatarina(Unisul).WealsoextendourappreciationtotheFundaçãodeAmparo
à Pesquisa e Inovação do Estado de Santa Catarina (FAPESC), Ânima Institute (AI), Coordenação
de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES), and the National Council for Scientiﬁc
and Technological Development (CNPq) for their invaluable support and assistance throughout the
research process.
References
Abdullah OM, Muhammad H (2023) The role of national culture in renewable energy consumption.
Int J Energy Rep. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egyr.2023.08.033
Afkar M, Jebreilzadeh M, Gavagsaz-Ghoachani R, Phattanasak M (2019) A teaching method based
on storytelling of a student social activity in renewable energy education. In: Proceedings of the
2019 6th international conference on technical education (ICTechEd6). Bangkok, Thailand, pp
19–20
Arangues IR, Siqueira AF, de Aguiar LG, Da Rós PCM, dos Santos Napoleão DA, Izário Filho HJ,
de Alcântara MAK (2022) Veículos elétricos: Um estudo descritivo de seus impactos ambientais.
Res Soc Dev 11(11):e10111132235–e10111132235
Avila LV, da Silveira JST, Neto EDR, Baggio DK (2019) Barriers, potentialities, and actions for
implementation of sustainable energy procedures in Brazilian federal universities. Environ Q
Manag 29(2):129–137
Barron AR, Domeshek M, Metz LE, Draucker LC, Strong AL (2021) Carbon neutrality should not
be the end goal: Lessons for institutional climate action from U.S. higher education. One Earth
4:1248. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2021.08.014
Berchin I, Amorim W et al (2015) First solar school in Brazil, the renewable electricity generation
in South America project and its impacts. Revista Gestão Sustentabilidade Ambiental 4:72–89
Bosman LB, Chelberg KA (2019) Integrating context and authenticity to increase pre-college
engagement through the STEM. Academy for renewable energy education. Int J Pedagog Innov
7:17–29
Brasil. Balanço Energético Nacional (2023). Ano base 2022/Empresa de Pesquisa Energética. EPE,
Rio de Janeiro, p 274
Brundtland (1987) Report of the Brundtland Commission: Our common future. Word Commission
on Environment and Development, Oxford University Press
Buckeridge MS, Philippi Jr, A (2020) Ciência e políticas públicas nas cidades: revelações da
pandemia da Covid-19. Estudos Avançados, São Paulo 34(99)
Ciriminna R, Ghahremani M, Karimi B, Pagliaro M (2023) Emerging green routes to nanocellulose.
Biofuels, Bioprod Bioreﬁn 17(1):10–17
Dunlap RA (2015) Sustainable energy. Dalhousie University, Halifax
Dyer G, Dyer M (2017) Strategic leadership for sustainability by higher education: the American
College and University Presidents’ Climate Commitment. J Clean Prod 140:111–116
Ehrlich R, Geller H (2017) Renewable energy, 2nd edn.: a ﬁrst course. Taylor & Francis Group,
New York, NY, USA, pp 1–490
Guven G, Sulun Y (2017) Pre-service teachers’ knowledge and awareness about renewable energy.
Renew Sustain Energy Rev 80:663–668
GWEC (2023) Global Wind Energy Council. Global wind report. Disponível em: https://gwec.net/
wp-content/uploads/2023/03/GWR-2023_interactive.pdf
IPCC (2018) Summary for policymakers. In: Masson-Delmotte V, Zhai P, Pörtner H-O, Roberts
D, Skea J, Shukla PR, Pirani A, Moufouma-Okia W, Péan C, Pidcock R, Connors S, Matthews
JBR, Chen Y, Zhou X, Gomis MI, Lonnoy E, Maycock T, Tignor M, Waterﬁeld T (eds) Global
warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC special report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above
632
L. de Aguiar Vieira et al.
pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of
strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and
efforts to eradicate poverty. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, New York, NY, USA,
pp 3–24, https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009157940.001
IPCC (2022) Climate Change 2022: impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability. In: Pörtner H-O, Roberts
DC, Tignor M, Poloczanska ES, Mintenbeck K, Alegría A, Craig M, Langsdorf S, Löschke S,
Möller V, Okem A, Rama B (eds) Contribution of working Group II to the sixth assessment report
of the intergovernmental panel on climate change. Cambridge University Press. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK, New York, NY, USA, p 3056. https://doi.org/10.1017/978
1009325844
Kestin T, Van Den Belt M, Denby L, Ross K, Thwaites J, Hawkes, M (2017) Getting started with
the SDGs in universities. Australia, New Zealand and Paciﬁc Edition. Sustainable Development
Solutions Network, Australia/Paciﬁc, Melbourne
Leal Filho W, Salvia AL, Do Paco A, Anholon R, Quelhas OLG, Rampasso IS et al (2019) A
comparative study of approaches towards energy efﬁciency and renewable energy use at higher
education institutions. J Clean Prod 237:117728
Lee L, Lin K, Guu Y, Chang L, Lai C (2013) The effect of hands-on ‘energy-saving house’ learning
activities on elementary school students’ knowledge, attitudes, and behavior regarding energy
saving and carbon-emissions reduction. Environ Educ Res 19:620–638
Leff E (2006) Racionalidade ambiental: a reapropriação da natureza. Civilização Brasileira, Rio de
Janeiro
Lucas H, Pinnington S, Cabeza LF (2018) Education and training gaps in the renewable energy
sector. Sol Energy 173:449–455
Masson-Delmotte VP, Zhai A, Pirani SL, Connors C, Péan S, Berger N, Caud Y, Chen L, Goldfarb
MI, Gomis M, Huang K, Leitzell L, Lonnoy JBL, Matthews TK, Maycock T, Waterﬁeld O,
Yelekçi RY, Zhou B (2021) Climate change 2021: the physical science basis. In: Contribution
of working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change. Cambridge University. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/downloads/report/IPCC_
AR6_WGI_Full_Report_smaller.pdf
Matana Júnior S, Antonio Leite Frandoloso M, Barbosa Brião V (2023) The role of HEIs to achieve
SDG7 goals from Netzero campuses: case studies and possibilities in Brazil. Int J Sustain Higher
Educ 24(2):462–480
Moura-Leite RC, Lopes JCDJ, Yamazaki C (2023) Brazilian federal universities and their sustain-
able practices based on sustainable logistics management plan. Int J Sustain High Educ
24(4):932–947
Ribeiro JMP, Hoeckesfeld L, Dal Magro CB, Favretto J, Barichello R, Lenzi FC et al (2021) Green
campus initiatives as sustainable development dissemination at higher education institutions:
students’ perceptions. J Clean Prod 312:127671. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.127671
Rocha JVP (2024) Uso de Energias Renováveis em processos contínuos: Um Estudo em uma grande
corporação do Brasil. Universidade Federal de Ouro Preto MG 2024
Scholten D, Bosaman R (2013) The Geopolitics of Renewable Energy: a mere shift of lanslide in
energy dependencies? http://www.researchgate.net/proﬁle/RickBosman
Seraﬁm MP, Leite JPA (2021) O papel das Universidades no alcance dos ODS no cenário do
“pós”-pandemia. Avaliação: Revista da Avaliação da Educação Superior 26(2)
United Nations (2021) Framework Convention on Climate Change. United Nations Climate Change
Annual Report 2020 (74p.) [Annual Report]. United Nations Framework. https://unfccc.int/ann
ualreport
UNSDN (2017) United Nations (2017) Sustainable Development Solution Network. About the
SDGs. 2017. http://unsdsn.org/what-we-do/sustainable-development-goals/about-the-sdgs/
Wang X, Guo L (2021) How to promote university students to innovative use renewable energy?
an inquiry-based learning course model. Sustainability 13:1418. https://doi.org/10.3390/su1303
1418
Promoting Renewable Energy Research in Brazilian Higher Education …
633
Wasiluk KL (2013) Beyond eco-efﬁciency: understanding CS through tl lents. J Intell Capital
14(1):102–126
Wiryadinata S, Morejohn J, Kornbluth K (2019) Pathways to carbon neutral energy systems at the
University of California, Davis. Renew Energy 130:853–866
Yates MR (2018) The evolution of wind power in Brazil: analysis of government policy and its
effects. São Paulo. https://bibliotecadigital.fgv.br/dspace/bitstream/handle/10438/25861/Matt%
20Yates%20%20Final%20Edit.pdf?sequence=4&isAllowed=y
Zhang QY, Best R, Chareunsy A (2018) Intergovernmental panel on climate change. summary for
policymakers. In: Global Warming of 1.5_C. An IPCC Special Report on the Impacts of Global
Warming of 1.5_C above Pre-industrial Levels and Related. Global Greenhouse Gas Emission
Pathways, in the Context of Strengthening. the Global Response to the Threat of Climate Change,
SustainableDevelopment,andEffortstoEradicatePoverty(WorldMeteorologicalOrganization)
Zheng G, Peng Z (2021) Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) of BEV’s environmental beneﬁts for meeting
the challenge of ICExit (Internal Combustion Engine Exit). Energy Rep 7:1203–1216. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.egyr.2021.02.039
An Agenda for Research
on Sustainability Reporting: Europe
and Beyond
Josef Baumüller, Michaela-Maria Schaffhauser-Linzatti, and Karina Sopp
Abstract Recent years have seen a consolidation of existing sustainability reporting
standards as well as the emergence of new players on that ﬁeld of regulation. In
particular, the publication of the ﬁrst European Sustainability Reporting Standards
in Europe (ESRS) and IFRS Sustainability Disclosure Standards (IFRS SDS) as
the intended “global baseline” for sustainability reporting attracted considerable
attention. The new regulatory environment for corporations in Europe as well as
in other jurisdictions is subject to drastic changes. But while the (political) ambi-
tions behind these developments are very similar, new questions arise with regard to
different approaches that are taken and potential obstacles that prevent actors from
achieving the aims. This chapter outlines these developments and some of the ques-
tions they evoke. It summarises some of the underlying assumptions of European and
international regulators that will now be put to an empirical test. Its results should
inform any further regulatory ambitions and thus contribute to the aim of changing
corporate behaviour, thus transforming business models and supporting sustainable
development.
Keywords Sustainability reporting · European Sustainability Reporting Standards
(ESRS) · Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) · IFRS Sustainability Disclosure
Standards (IFRS SDS)
J. Baumüller (B)
Institute of Management Science, Technical University of Vienna, Theresianumgasse 27, 1040
Vienna, Austria
e-mail: josef.baumueller@tuwien.ac.at
M.-M. Schaffhauser-Linzatti
Department of Accounting, Innovation and Strategy, University of Vienna, Wasagasse 12/2/1,
1090 Vienna, Austria
K. Sopp
Entrepreneurship and Business Taxation, Technical University of Freiberg, Schlossplatz 1, 09599
Freiberg, Germany
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_35
635
636
J. Baumüller et al.
1
Introduction
Whilst the origins of sustainability reporting can be traced back to the second half of
the 20th century, the publication of the ﬁrst set of guidelines by the Global Reporting
Initiative (GRI) 1999/2000 is considered as marking the point in time when this
reporting concept was fully formulated (United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP) 2019; Larrinaga and Bebbington 2021). As these guidelines were further
developed over the next two decades, they were taken up by large, mostly publicly
traded companies around the world. In many cases, this uptake was driven by volun-
tary practices; mandatory legislation was still more the exception then the rule (Chris-
tensen et al. 2021). The great ﬂexibility granted to companies because of their volun-
tary adoption, together with the increasing availability of more frameworks and stan-
dards, however, harmed the overall effectiveness of the reports published. This, in
turn, often raised concerns about “greenwashing practices” in which these companies
can indulge (Marquis et al. 2016; Gatti et al. 2019; Vigneau and Adams 2023).
In the early 2010s, this regulatory environment slowly started to change. The
ﬁnancial crisis in 2008/2009 highlighted a need for the stronger regulation of corpo-
rations to protect ﬁnancial markets and avoid the risk of “short termism” (Kinderman
2020). In the wake of the Paris Climate Conference and the publication of the Sustain-
able Development Goals in 2015, a global consensus was achieved that more efforts
were needed in the ﬁeld of sustainability regulation and that corporations should be
required to contribute more to sustainable development (United Nations Environ-
ment Programme (UNEP) 2015). This culminated in the creation of a sustainable
ﬁnance agenda to help give greater weight to sustainability when ﬁnancing decisions
are made on capital markets; at the same time, the agenda requires increased efforts
to be made to enhance the transparency of corporations’ sustainability performance
to allow appropriate capital allocation to take place (Migliorelli 2021).
This global development changed the business environment in which corpora-
tions operate around the world, both with regard to increasing stakeholder expecta-
tions and to the adoption of a regulatory framework. In the European Union, these
changes materialised at the highest pace: By 2018, the EU Commission had already
published its Action Plan on “Financing Sustainable Growth” which supports efforts
to implement the principles of sustainable ﬁnance in the EU capital market. Only
one year later, the Green Deal expressed the ambition of the newly elected European
Commission to establish the jurisdiction as a global forerunner in pursuing the goal
of sustainable development. Amongst all the different measures cited in these publi-
cations, corporate sustainability reporting played a vital role in achieving the political
aims (Baumüller and Grbenic 2021; Chiu 2022; Zetzsche and Anker-Sørensen 2022).
These efforts resulted in work on the Corporate Sustainability Reporting Direc-
tive (CSRD), which was ultimately published in 2022, and in the European Sustain-
ability Reporting Standards (ESRS) introduced by the CSRD to provide European
corporations with detailed and binding guidelines to direct their reporting. Many
considered this to be a “game changer”, presenting companies with ﬁnancial chal-
lenges by imposing considerable costs on them as well as operational challenges by
An Agenda for Research on Sustainability Reporting: Europe and Beyond
637
requiring an unprecedented level of transparency on sustainability matters in corpo-
rate reporting (e.g. Grabs and Stuchtey 2023). However, opinions differ regarding
whether the CSRD and ESRS have led to competitive advantages or disadvantages
for European corporations.
Thirdcountriesfollowedsuitebymakingsimilar,althoughlessfar-reachingdevel-
opments. Concerning the introduction of reporting requirements, these developments
were in many cases driven by the eminence of a new organisation that set bench-
marks for standards in the ﬁeld of sustainability reporting: the IFRS (International
Financial Reporting Standards) Foundation. In 2020, this foundation proposed to
create a new set of detailed international sustainability reporting standards based on
the IFRS. This move was not only greeted by considerable support from around the
globe, but also changed the landscape of such reporting standards. Currently, capital
market regulators as well as many jurisdictions outside of the European Union have
announced their intention to adopt these international reporting standards, namely
the IFRS Sustainability Disclosure Standards (IFRS SDS).
As a result, sustainability reporting is increasingly moving from a voluntary prac-
tice to a legal requirement. And the landscape for the standards on which these reports
are based is subject to harmonisation and subsequently centring around three impor-
tant sets of standards: the ESRS, the IFRS SDS, and the GRI standards. The latter
served as an important starting point for the work on the former two sets of standards
and are still most often used by corporations around the world (KPMG 2022).
These important changes also imply that contributions from researchers are
needed to support those setting standards, legislators and corporations that are
required to translate the new reporting requirements into practice. This chapter ﬁrst
outlines the key features of the future landscape for sustainability reporting. A Euro-
pean perspective is highlighted, taking into consideration the global developments
and their unavoidable implications for European companies. Subsequently, impor-
tant research questions that arise from recent developments are outlined. Finally, a
summary and an outlook conclude this chapter.
2
The Changed Landscape for Sustainability
Reporting—An Overview
2.1
CSRD and ESRS: Mandatory Requirements Driven
by High Ambitions
In the EU, the CSRD (published in 2022) replaced the reporting requirements deﬁned
in the Non-Financial Reporting Directive (NFRD) from 2014. The NFRD was once
considered a milestone in corporate reporting and established mandatory sustain-
ability reporting requirements across the European Union. But its shortcomings
soon became obvious: Its application has not resulted in the completeness, compara-
bility, or reliability of data that has been reported by European companies (European
638
J. Baumüller et al.
Commission 2021; Baboukardos et al. 2023). The main drivers for these deﬁcits
were found to be a limited scope of application, vague and unspeciﬁed reporting
requirements, and a lack of external assurance requirements. Differences in the legal
incorporaton of the Directive into national law in the Union’s member states also
contributed to these issues (European Commission 2020).
Whilst developing the CSRD, the European Commission tried to address these
shortcomings and thus create a more ambitious regulatory framework that meets
the demands of the newly adopted sustainable ﬁnance agenda. Regarding the many
aspects where the CSRD introduced new requirements, one stands out due to its
important role in the entire reform process: the concept of “double materiality”. By
introducing this concept in the regulatory framework, the European Commission
strove to ensure that corporations not only report on sustainability matters that are
relevant for their business models but also consider all their material impacts on
environment and society, even if these do not ﬁnancially impact their operations.
Furthermore, the CSRD was developed to encourage companies to report on how they
address all these impacts in their governance, strategy and operations. This implies
that the reporting content has an extensive scope (Baumüller and Sopp 2022). On
an abstract level, this directive ultimately reﬂects different approaches that can be
taken to achieve sustainability: to fulﬁl a moral obligation (impacts on environment
and society), to meet a business requirement (ﬁnancial impacts), or to satisfy the
combination of these (Allen and Craig 2016).
The CSRD extends the scope of reporting corporations have to do on their sustain-
ability performance to encompass all large corporations based in the European Union.
In addition, under certain conditions, non-EU groups and corporations also have to
apply the CSRD regulations. Whilst the ﬁrst corporations that are subject to the
directive will have to publish their reports for the ﬁnancial year 2024, the scope is
slowly being extended up to the ﬁnancial year 2028. According to the CSRD, sustain-
ability reports have to be included in the management commentary, be published in
a digital format and will be subject to an external review by auditors or other assur-
ance providers. Corporations failing to meet the new reporting requirements will
be subject to penalties speciﬁed by the member states; these should be similar to
penalties imposed due to deﬁcits in their ﬁnancial reports.
The CSRD introduces ESRS into the regulatory framework. The ESRS have a
structure similar to that of established standards, such as the GRI’s standards for
sustainability reporting, but also the IFRS in the context of ﬁnancial reporting. These
standards were designed to provide clearer and more comprehensive guidance for
corporations that fall under the jurisdiction of the new reporting requirements. Only
the basic structure of these standards, their fundamental principles, and the most
important sustainability topics to be covered are laid out in the CSRD.
The European Commission tasked the EFRAG (formerly the “European Financial
Reporting Advisory Group”) to develop drafts for the ESRS. The EFRAG is an
association initially set up to advise the Commission during the process of adopting
the IFRS into European law; given its expertise in setting standard processes, it was
considered as the most suitable partner for supporting the development of standards
for sustainability reporting. However, due to the lack of public authority, the ESRS
An Agenda for Research on Sustainability Reporting: Europe and Beyond
639
(drafts) subsequently had to be endorsed by the European Commission in the form
of delegated acts to become legally binding in the EU member states.
Set 1 of the ESRS was formally adopted by the European Commission on
July 31, 2023. These standards consist of twelve sector-agnostic standards, cate-
gorised as either cross-cutting standards or topical standards on ESG matters. These
contain reporting requirements for European corporations regarding their ﬁrst reports
published. However, these requirements also refer to other standards that have to be
considered, and most importantly the IFRS SDS (see Sect. 2.2) and the GRI stan-
dards (see Sect. 2.3). In the next few years, the EFRAG will be tasked with improving
the previously issued ESRS and developing new standards, including SME-speciﬁc
standards by the end of 2024 and sector-speciﬁc standards by mid-2026.
2.2
IFRS SDS: The New “Global Baseline”
for Sustainability Reporting
Whilst the European Commission started its project to replace the NFRD with the
CSRD in early 2020, the IFRS Foundation raised eyebrows when it published a
discussion paper on extending its activities into the ﬁeld of sustainability reporting
in September of the same year (IFRS Foundation 2020). Motivated by a perceived
demand on the market for a set of globally harmonised standards as well as by its
experience in setting standards, the IFRS Foundation suggested establishing a new
International Sustainability Standards Board (ISSB). This Board is tasked with devel-
oping sustainability reporting standards in close collaboration with the International
Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and with extending the existing standards and
initiatives in the ﬁeld of sustainability reporting.
In its initial outline of the suggested standards, the IFRS Foundation already made
clear that its understanding of sustainability report content differed from that of the
ESRS. So, instead of taking a double materiality approach, the IFRS Foundation
favoured the concept of single materiality, establishing investors as the main audience
for the new standards. They also formulated a “climate-ﬁrst approach”, arguing that
climate-related disclosures should be published ﬁrst and that reporting standards on
other sustainability matters should be subsequently prioritised.
The ISSB was formally established in November 2021 at COP26 in Glasgow. At
the same time, the consolidation of the US-American Value Reporting Foundation
(VRF) and the Climate Disclosure Standards Board (CDSB) into the IFRS Founda-
tion was announced. Consequently, the IFRS Foundation took on the responsibility
for the reporting standards maintained by these organisations, and most importantly
the sustainability reporting standards of the Sustainability Accounting Standards
Board (SASB) and the International Integrated Reporting Framework by the Inter-
national Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC). This approach was taken to form the
basis for the work on the IFRS SDS and support their harmonisation efforts with the
IFRS, tasks which could be streamlined because resources were taken over from both
640
J. Baumüller et al.
the VRF and the CDSB. Regarding the impact of this consolidation on the corporate
reporting landscape, Forbes magazine dubbed this as “the biggest change in corpo-
rate reporting since the 1930s” (Mirchandani 2021), referring to similar attempts at
collaboration between U.S. American and international organisations to set standards
in the ﬁeld of ﬁnancial reporting that have failed for decades.
In June 2023, the ﬁrst two standards developed by the ISSB were published:
IFRS S1 and IFRS S2. The former deﬁnes general reporting principles whilst the
latter addresses climate-related disclosures. Because they incorporated the SASB
standards, the IFRS SDS refer to the SASB sector-speciﬁc disclosure requirements
thatcomplementthegeneralreportingrequirementsofIFRSS2.UnliketheESRSand
the GRI standards, the IFRS SDS are already characterised by a strong industry focus.
However, with regard to other ESG matters that are considered to be material from
a single materiality perspective, the IFRS SDS require companies to refer to other,
more comprehensive reporting standards such as the ESRS or the GRI standards.
Most notably, the IFRS SDS lack the legal authority to mandate the application of
their standards to any number of corporations. Therefore, although the IFRS SDS are
applicable from the ﬁnancial year of 2024 and onwards, it is not clear which corpo-
rations will actually apply these standards. However, several jurisdictions—albeit
outside of the European Union—have already announced that they will either adopt
the IFRS SDS or will develop their own set of sustainability reporting standards
based on these standards. What is more, the International Organization of Securities
Commissions (IOSCO) was among the ﬁrst to express its support for the IFRS SDS
and has already endorsed them (International Organization of Securities Commis-
sions (IOSCO) 2023). This could imply that securities market regulators around the
world might impose the requirement of applying the IFRS SDS to listed corporations
in the future.
Against that background, the IFRS Foundation has described its aim to develop the
IFRS SDS into a “global baseline” for sustainability reporting, remarking that “IFRS
Sustainability Disclosure Standards are intended to provide a global baseline and
to be compatible with jurisdiction-speciﬁc requirements, including those intended
to meet broader stakeholder information needs” (IFRS Foundation 2022a). Again,
with regard to the latter reporting requirements, the ESRS and the GRI standards
are especially addressed, thus outlining the ambition for close cooperation between
these sets of standards instead of competition.
2.3
GRI Standards: A Pioneer in Search of Future Directions
The developments that led to the publication of the ESRS and the IFRS SDS put
the GRI in a peculiar situation: As a pioneer in global sustainability reporting, the
GRI paved the way for both new sets of reporting standards. And whilst the GRI
standards have been established as the most important reporting framework referred
to by European companies in the past (Centre for European Policy Studies (CEPS)
2020) under the NFRD, the changing regulatory environment implies that it has
An Agenda for Research on Sustainability Reporting: Europe and Beyond
641
become considerably less relevant in Europe and has a new, powerful competitor on
a global level. For many, this placed the future of the GRI as an inﬂuential standard
setter in question (see also de Villiers 2022).
The GRI responded to these developments in several ways. First, it contributed
to both the developments of the ESRS and the IFRS SDS. Especially with regard to
the collaboration with the EFRAG, this work started early and was considered to be
very fruitful: By the time the work on the ESRS commenced, both organisations had
already signed a statement of cooperation (EFRAG and GRI 2021). Subsequently,
the GRI standards were fundamental to the development of the ESRS—an aspect
reﬂected in the Basis for Conclusions to the ESRS, which describes how the ESRS
were extensively aligned with the GRI standards. What is more, after the ﬁnal version
of the ESRS was published, work on an interoperability statement was intensiﬁed.
This statement shows the similarities between both sets of standards and allows
corporations that report under the CSRD/ESRS to claim a “reference to” the GRI
standards in their sustainability reports (EFRAG and GRI 2023).
Regarding the development of the IFRS SDS, cooperation was also sought
between the GRI and the IFRS Foundation. However, this cooperation was not
pursued as intensely as the one between the EFRAG and the GRI, probably mainly
due to the different priorities of both sets of standards, i.e. addressing the perspectives
of investor vs. stakeholders in a broader sense. A Memorandum of Understanding
was signed in 2022 (IFRS Foundation 2022b):
[…] The IFRS Foundation and GRI recognise the considerable public interest in aligning
where possible their respective work programmes, terminology and guidance, helping to
reduce the reporting burden for companies and to further harmonise the sustainability
reporting landscape at an international level.
By working together, the IFRS Foundation and GRI provide two ‘pillars’ of international
sustainability reporting—a ﬁrst pillar representing investor-focused capital market standards
of IFRS Sustainability Disclosure Standards developed by the ISSB, and a second pillar
of GRI sustainability reporting requirements set by the GSSB, compatible with the ﬁrst,
designed to meet multi-stakeholder needs.
Furthermore, a Sustainability Innovation Lab was established as part of the coop-
eration between the organisations. However, the difference between the quality of
this cooperation and that resulting from the close work with the EFRAG is obvious.
“Coexistence” is the clear aim.
At the same time, the GRI started to work on its own reporting standards to
more clearly deﬁne their proﬁle. This work comprises placing a stronger focus on
presenting the impact of company activities and on providing guidance regarding
how these impacts can be identiﬁed by performing a materiality analysis. The sector-
speciﬁc reporting requirements with regard to these impacts should also be extended
(Adams 2023). In consequence, the GRI is trying to position their standards as a
complement to the IFRS SDS whilst informing the discussions in the European
Union on impact reporting.
642
J. Baumüller et al.
3
Research Questions for Addressing the Challenges
of the New Sustainability Reporting Landscape
3.1
“Completeness” of Sustainability Information
Although the NFRD faced considerable criticism, research has shown that it induced
a change in corporate behaviour to a certain extent (Cuomo et al. 2022; Fiechter et al.
2022): Corporations adapted their business activities to create “reporting content”
that met the expectations of their stakeholders. Obviously, however, this change
was not considered to be sufﬁcient. Thus, European corporations are facing being
subjected to far more ambitious legislation in the form of the CSRD and the ESRS.
This directive and these standards extend both the extent to which the corporations are
subject to the new reporting requirements and to the content required in these reports.
On a global level, the adoption of the IFRS SDS in many jurisdictions implies that—
also outside of Europe—corporations will have to meet demanding new regulations
when doing their reporting.
It will become more and more important for European corporations to measure,
report and ultimately manage their impacts on environment and society. Given the
elusive and difﬁcult-to-conceptualise nature of impacts, this requirement presents
corporations with a highly complex and potentially burdensome task. It is, never-
theless, of high importance for companies to complete this task to fulﬁl the overall
ambitions set forth in the new regulations (Pesci et al. 2023). Compared to the ESRS,
the IFRS SDS seem to have taken a simpler approach to addressing this aspect
(Abhayawansa 2022). One obvious but still highly important task that researchers
must carry out in the future is to compare the costs for corporations with the beneﬁts
and to clearly deﬁne ‘sustainable development’ in a company context.
The understanding of the principle of materiality is another key element of the
new regulation. In the past, researchers had described materiality as fundamental
for sustainability reporting (Baumüller and Schaffhauser-Linzatti 2018), but this
principle has also been the object of heated discussions recently. The fact that the
deﬁnitions used for materiality in the ESRS and the IFRS SDS differ is considered
to be one of the major differences between these standards (Spandel et al. 2023).
Researchers will be able to contribute more to the discussion on the content of
sustainability reporting once they shed more light on the beneﬁts and restrictions
of this heterogeneity, as well as show possible ways forward regarding the need for
alignment.
Another idea which underpins both the ESRS and the IFRS SDS is the need
to adopt ﬁnancial reporting concepts to build robust and effective sustainability
reporting standards. This applies to individual elements and principles as well as
to the overall structure of the standards (Abela 2022). Empirical testing is needed,
however, to determine the actual usefulness of this approach. Moreover, the literature
proposes moving from sustainability reporting to integrated reporting as a next step
to improve the relevance of corporate reporting as a whole (Cenci 2023). In both the
ESRS and the IFRS SDS, this is reﬂected by invoking the concept of connectivity;
An Agenda for Research on Sustainability Reporting: Europe and Beyond
643
as the IFRS Foundation has taken over the Integrated Reporting Framework by the
IIRC (see Sect. 2.2), it can be reasonably expected that both reporting concepts might
converge in the future (Wagenhofer 2024).
Even when considering standards other than ﬁnancial reporting standards, there
seemstobeaconsensusamongEFRAG,IFRSFoundationandGRIthatsustainability
reporting standards must reﬂect sector-speciﬁc elements to provide useful informa-
tion. For that reason, sector-speciﬁc disclosures are needed for each set of standards.
Although such disclosure requirements echo previous demands from the literature
(Eccles et al. 2012), empirical ﬁndings show that sector-speciﬁc disclosure require-
ments may suffer from the same challenges as sector-agnostic disclosure require-
ments: Heterogeneity might also be an issue within an industry, thus restricting the
usefulness of such disclosures and requiring a level of granularity as well as ﬂexibility
that accordingly goes beyond the existing approaches used in sustainability reporting
standards (Costa et al. 2022). However, despite the importance such sector-speciﬁc
standards are granted in the current debate, there is considerable lack of evidence
regarding how they should be designed to address such issues effectively.
3.2
“Comparability” of Data on Sustainability Performance
In Europe, the shift from the NFRD to the CSRD marks the next step in a journey
that started with the introduction of the NFRD, i.e. the move from voluntary to
mandatory sustainability reporting (Christensen et al. 2021; Breijer and Orij 2022).
For the ﬁrst time, a huge proportion of European corporations will have to publish
such reports based on clearly deﬁned, binding standards. Other jurisdictions will
make similar experiences as the IFRS SDS are implemented on an ongoing basis.
This new regulatory framework introduces new levels of complexity, and it will
be put to the test if these mandatory requirements on a large scale are truly more
effective than a market-based approach. At the very least, considerable side effects
should be expected in the form of additional costs imposed on companies, although
the evidence for potential beneﬁts for corporations is scarce (Centre for European
Policy Studies (CEPS) and Milieu 2022).
At the same time, an underlying assumption is being made in the current devel-
opments: As reporting principle, comparability is as important and effective for
sustainability reporting as it is for ﬁnancial reporting. However, this assumption may
not be true, and the nature of impacts and the ways a corporation operates within its
environment and society might call for a more ﬂexible reporting system (Adams and
Abhayawansa 2022). In any case, the idea of comparable sustainability information
differs from our common understanding of comparable ﬁnancial information (Korca
et al. 2023). More information is also needed to determine how aware sustainability
report users are of these differences and how they integrate them into their analyses.
Regarding another facet of comparability, the new sustainability reporting stan-
dards will be compared in terms of their applicability and effectiveness. This will
not only reﬂect differences in their content but also in the costs they impose on
644
J. Baumüller et al.
companies subject to them. It seems likely that, in any case, these costs will be
considerable. For this reason, researchers must further develop and evaluate the idea
of interoperability with reference to corporations that have to apply two or more of
these standards. They also need to work out reasonable cost–beneﬁt relationships
and how organisations setting standards can (and should) collaborate in their work to
ensure the acceptance of these standards (Giner and Luque-Vilchez 2022; Baumüller
and Leitner-Hanetseder 2023). In turn, this work might enable these organisations
to converge and consolidate sustainability reporting standards still further in the
future and enable researchers to answer the question of the optimal extent of global
harmonisation. It may even enable these groups to determine how many different
sets of sustainability reporting standards are needed (Ali et al. 2023; Stolowy and
Paugam 2023) and help corporations determine which set of standards is more useful
for them under speciﬁc circumstances (Christensen et al. 2021). In a wider context,
it will be of interest to see how the GRI will deﬁne its future role, as it has to position
its standards against both the ESRS and the IFRS SDS (de Villiers et al. 2022).
3.3
“Reliability” of Reports Published by Corporations
With respect to the reliability of information, the external assurance of sustainability
reports has become one important element of current reforms. Whilst the IFRS SDS
and the GRI standards address and recommend such assurance, the CSRD mandates
that every report based on its provisions must be externally validated. This presents
both corporations and their assurance service providers with considerable challenges;
at the same time, this might give ESRS-based reports a competitive advantage over
reports based on other sets of standards given the stakeholders’ increased awareness
of the problem and their tendency to react strongly to the threat of greenwashing.
The requirements with regard to external assurance, however, are amongst the
most ﬂexible provisions in the CSRD (Accountancy Europe 2021). Even if the overall
ambition is to ensure that these assurance provisions are on par with the requirements
for ﬁnancial statement audits, they fall short in several aspects. Thus, new expec-
tation gaps might arise (Association of Chartered Certiﬁed Accountants (ACCA)
2023). This could undermine attempts to fulﬁl many of the ambitions associated
with the regulation. For that reason, this problem of the expectation gap under the
new regulatory framework requires close attention.
First, the CSRD grants considerable ﬂexibility with regard to the question of
who might be tasked with assurance reporting. Besides the statutory auditor of the
ﬁnancial statements, other auditors or even independent assurance-service providers
(IASP) could be mandated to perform this task. This option is currently being debated
by the member states as the CSRD is translated into national law. Whilst empirical
research shows that, in the past, auditors were most often employed (Fernandez-
Feijoo et al. 2016; Alsahali and Malagueño 2022), sustainability report users do
not seem to value assurance services from auditors more than from IASP (Simnet
et al. 2009; Thompson et al. 2022). Empirical evidence on the pros and cons of the
An Agenda for Research on Sustainability Reporting: Europe and Beyond
645
corporations’ choices and the consequences of this choice on the informational value
of sustainability reporting are scarce. Given the heated nature of the debate on who
should be tasked with these services (e.g. Willems 2023), performing more objective
research would beneﬁt all parties involved.
The questions of who should be responsible for assuring sustainability reporting,
the scope of services provided, and, most importantly, the intensity of these services
merit further consideration. Regarding the latter question, the CSRD initially requires
only limited assurance services, as opposed to reasonable assurance services, which
are common for ﬁnancial information audits. Will sustainability report users be able
to distinguish between these different levels of reliability or contrast these levels with
the level of assurance available for ﬁnancial information? Previous research indicates
that this might not be the case (Sheldon and Jenkins 2020).
Flexibility is also granted—and necessary—with regard to the standards serving
as the basis for the assurance of sustainability reports. Currently, there is no glob-
ally accepted assurance standard that can be applied fully address speciﬁc aspects
of either the ESRS, IFRS SDS, or GRI standards. To tackle this problem, the Inter-
national Auditing and Assurance Standards Board (IAASB) has published its ﬁrst
draft International Standard on Sustainability Assurance (ISSA); once a ﬁnal draft
has been published, this could be adopted into European law and probably will also
be employed in other jurisdictions.
Finally, researchers have shown that assurance services impact the reporting—and
subsequently business—activities of their respective clients (Liu et al. 2023). Thus,
assurance service providers might contribute to the change that is desired by intro-
ducing the new reporting standards and their accompanying legislation. However,
this new ﬁeld of activity might also change these assurance service providers, and
especially audit ﬁrms whose corporate culture might need to adapt to reﬂect the new
skill set of people engaging in these assurance activities (Bakarich et al. 2023). Such
change in the service providers should therefore be monitored carefully in the future.
4
Summary and Outlook
The world of sustainability reporting and the entire corporate reporting landscape
are going through a period of signiﬁcant change. Driven by political ambitions and
changing stakeholder expectations, recent years saw both the development of new
sustainability reporting standards as well as the consolidation of existing standards.
Whilst some initiatives have been created to promote the stronger harmonisation of
these reporting requirements, nevertheless, it is obvious that each of the emerging
new standards reﬂects different understandings of how corporations should be held
accountable for their activities in the light of sustainable development. These stan-
dards all have one thing in common: They express an ambition that, in the future,
sustainability reporting should become much more similar to ﬁnancial reporting
regarding its relevance and reliability.
646
J. Baumüller et al.
Going beyond mere reporting requirements, an important next step was under-
taken by the European Union in 2023: By agreeing on a new Corporate Sustainability
Due Diligence Directive (CSDDD), a new directive was introduced that will require
certain European and non-EU corporations to actively engage in sustainability prac-
tice, and especially to protect human rights and reduce their emissions (European
Commission 2023). In addition, the CSDDD describes severe sanctions for corpo-
rations that do not comply with the new requirements, including the right for stake-
holders all over the world to sue these corporations. As both the scope and elements of
the CSDDD and the CSRD/ESRS are similar in many respects, and as sustainability
reporting per se is a fundamental aspect of the required sustainability due diligence,
this new directive will contribute to the relevance of sustainability reports published
in the future. However, the complexity of the regulatory environment will increase
as well (Villiers 2022). It can be expected that many of the questions outlined in
Chap. 3 will gain more weight.
While this chapter covered three sets of sustainability reporting standards, a fourth
one will emerge soon: In 2022, also the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC) proposed rules for requiring registrants to include climate-related in their
public ﬁlings (SEC 2022). Although it is still unclear which concrete requirements
will be part of the ﬁnal regulation, it can be expected that—unlike the existing sustain-
ability reporting standards—an approach will be taken which focuses on ﬁnancial
reporting disclosures. And whilst this regulation will only be relevant for domestic
and foreign registrants on U.S. stock markets, its expected impact will be important
enough to place it on par with the European Union and IFRS Foundation standards.
Reﬂecting that importance, the literature already uses the term “Big Three Sustain-
ability Disclosure Standards” (e.g. Ohl et al. 2022). This opens the door for more
comparative research, and especially on the interconnection between ﬁnancial and
sustainability reporting and on the impacts that heterogenous approaches might have
on decisions made by corporations and their stakeholders.
In conclusion, although recent years have seen considerable changes in the regu-
latory environment for sustainability reporting, a similar abundancy of regulatory
changes is expected in the upcoming years. The pace of activities to set standards
has been deﬁned by political priorities and due processes during their development,
and the ﬁrst-time application of the new reporting requirements will open the door
to extensive empirical analyses of the effects of this regulation. But there also seem
to be many questions about conceptual work that merit closer attention, some of
which address fundamental assumptions of the current reforms and deserve further
examination. Such studies, in turn, can inform standard setters, helping them decide
how to set priorities and improve their activities to reach the common aim of all sets
of standards and the organisations that apply them: to change corporate behaviour
and transform business models to support sustainable development.
For more than a decade, the promise of sustainability reporting has been nothing
less than “accountants will save the world” (Bakker 2013). In the next years, this
promise will be put to the test.
An Agenda for Research on Sustainability Reporting: Europe and Beyond
647
References
Abela M (2022) A new direction? the “mainstreaming” of sustainability reporting. Sustain Account
Manag Policy J 13(6):1261–1283. https://doi.org/10.1108/SAMPJ-06-2021-0201
Abhayawansa S (2022) Swimming against the tide: back to single materiality for sustainability
reporting. Sustain Account Manag Policy J 13(6):1361–1385. https://doi.org/10.1108/SAMPJ-
07-2022-0378
Accountancy Europe (2021) FAQs on Sustainability information assurance. https://accountancye
urope.eu/wp-content/uploads/2022/12/211103_FAQs_Sustainability%C2%B0reporting_ass
urance_Accountancy_EU.pdf
Adams CA, Abhayawansa S (2022) Connecting the COVID-19 pandemic, environmental, social
and governance (ESG) investing and calls for ‘harmonisation’ of sustainability reporting. Crit
Perspect Account 82:102309. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpa.2021.102309
Adams CA (2023) Bridging the gap: achieving credible and comparable impact reporting. https://
www.globalreporting.org/news/news-center/bridging-the-gap-achieving-credible-and-compar
able-impact-reporting/
Ali I, Fukofuka PT, Narayan AK (2023) Critical reﬂections on sustainability reporting standard
setting. Sustain Account Manag Policy J 14(4):776–791. https://doi.org/10.1108/SAMPJ-01-
2022-0054
Allen MW, Craig CA (2016) Rethinking corporate social responsibility in the age of climate change:
a communication perspective. Int J Corp Soc Responsib 1(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40991-
016-0002-8
Alsahali KF, Malagueño R (2022) An empirical study of sustainability reporting assurance: current
trends and new insights. J Account Organ Chang 18(5):617–642. https://doi.org/10.1108/JAOC-
05-2020-0060
Association of Chartered Certiﬁed Accountants (ACCA) (2023) Sustainability Assurance–Rising
to the Challenge. London
Baboukardos D, Gaia S, Lassou P, Soobaroyen T (2023) The multiverse of non-ﬁnancial reporting
regulation. Account Forum 47(2):47–165. https://doi.org/10.1080/01559982.2023.2204786
Bakarich KM, Hoffmann M, Marcy AS, O’Brien P (2023) Accountants’ views on sustainability
reporting: a generational divide. Curr Issues Account 17(1):A22–A35. https://doi.org/10.2308/
CIIA-2022-003
Bakker P (2013) Accountants will save the world. Harvard Bus Rev. https://hbr.org/2013/03/acc
ountants-will-save-the-worl
Baumüller J, Grbenic S (2021) Moving from non-ﬁnancial to sustainability reporting: analyzing the
EU Commission’s proposal for a Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD). Facta
Universitatis, Ser Econ Organ 18(4):369–381. https://doi.org/10.22190/FUEO210817026B
Baumüller J, Leitner-Hanetseder S (2023) Accounting for a green economy. In: Lehner OM, Harrer
T, Silvola H, Weber O (eds) The Routledge handbook of green ﬁnance. London, pp 23–40.
https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003345497
Baumüller J, Schaffhauser-Linzatti M-M (2018) In search of materiality for nonﬁnancial informa-
tion–reporting requirements of the Directive 2014/95/EU, NachhaltigkeitsManagementForum
26(1):101–111. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00550-018-0473-z
Baumüller J, Sopp K (2022) Double materiality and the shift from non-ﬁnancial to European
sustainability reporting: review, outlook and implications. J Appl Acc Res 23(1):8–28. https://
doi.org/10.1108/JAAR-04-2021-0114
Breijer R, Orij RP (2022) The comparability of non-ﬁnancial information: an exploration of
the impact of the non-ﬁnancial reporting directive (NFRD, 2014/95/EU). Account Europe
19(2):332–361. https://doi.org/10.1080/17449480.2022.2065645
Cenci S (2023) A large-scale analysis of the heterogeneity of markets’ reactions to the disclosure of
nonﬁnancial information. J Sustain Financ Investment. https://doi.org/10.1080/20430795.2023.
2228746
648
J. Baumüller et al.
Centre for European Policy Studies (CEPS) and Milieu (2022) Cost-beneﬁt analysis of the First Set
of draft ESRS. Brussels 2022
Centre for European Policy Studies (CEPS) (2020) Study on the Non-Financial Reporting Directive.
Brussels 2020
Chiu IHY (2022) The EU sustainable ﬁnance agenda: developing governance for double materiality
in sustainability metrics. Euro Bus Organ Law Rev 23(1):87–123. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40
804-021-00229-9
Christensen HB, Hail L, Leuz C (2021) Mandatory CSR and sustainability reporting: economic
analysis and literature review. Rev Acc Stud 26(3):1176–1248. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11142-
021-09609-5
Costa E, Pesci C, Andreaus M, Taufer E (2022) When a sector-speciﬁc standard for non-ﬁnancial
reporting is not enough: evidence from microﬁnance institutions in Italy. Sustain Account Manag
Policy J 13(6):1334–1360. https://doi.org/10.1108/SAMPJ-06-2021-0253
Cuomo F, Gaia S, Girardone C, Piserà S (2022) The effects of the EU non-ﬁnancial reporting
directive on corporate social responsibility. Euro J Financ 30(7):726–752. https://doi.org/10.
1080/1351847X.2022.2113812
de Villiers C, La Torre M, Molinari M (2022) The Global Reporting Initiative’s (GRI) past,
present and future: critical reﬂections and a research agenda on sustainability reporting
(standard-setting). Pac Account Rev 34(5):728–747. https://doi.org/10.1108/PAR-02-2022-
0034
Eccles RG, Krzus MP, Rogers J, Serafeim G (2012) The need for sector-speciﬁc materiality and
sustainability reporting standards. J Appl Corp Financ 24(2):65–71. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
1745-6622.2012.00380.x
EFRAG and GRI (2021) EFRAG and GRI landmark Statement of Cooperation: Working towards
international sustainability reporting convergence, EFRAG Project Task Force on European
sustainability reporting standards (PTF-ESRS) and GRI sign landmark Statement of Cooper-
ation. https://www.efrag.org/Assets/Download?assetUrl=%2Fsites%2Fwebpublishing%2FSite
Assets%2FEFRAG%2520GRI%2520COOPERATION%2520PR.pdf
EFRAG and GRI (2023) EFRAG and GRI enhance collaboration with deeper ties new
cooperation agreement reached, as GRI-ESRS Interoperability Index is made publicly
available. https://www.efrag.org/Assets/Download?assetUrl=/sites/webpublishing/SiteAssets/
Final+Press+release+-+GRI-EFRAG+MoU+and+interoperability+tool_final.pdf
European Commission (2020) Summary report of the public consultation on the review of the non-
ﬁnancial reporting directive, 20 February 2020–11 June 2020. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=PI_COM:Ares(2020)3997889
European Commission (2021) Commission Staff working document: ﬁtness check on the EU
framework for public reporting by companies, Brussels, 21.4.2021, SWD(2021) 81 ﬁnal
European Commission (2023) Press release: commission welcomes political agreement on rules
enforcing human rights and environmental sustainability in global supply chains, 14.12.2023.
https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_23_6599
Fernandez-Feijoo B, Romero S, Ruiz S (2016) The assurance market of sustainability reports: what
do accounting ﬁrms do? J Clean Prod 139:1128–1137. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.
08.157
Fiechter P, Hitz J-M, Lehmann N (2022) Real effects of a widespread csr reporting mandate:
evidence from the European Union’s CSR directive. J Account Res 60(4):1499–1549. https://
doi.org/10.1111/1475-679X.12424
Gatti L, Seele P, Rademacher L (2019) Grey zone in–greenwash out. A review of greenwashing
research and implications for the voluntary-mandatory transition of CSR. Int J Corp Soc
Responsib 4(6). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40991-019-0044-9
Giner B, Luque-Vilchez M (2022) A commentary on the “new” institutional actors in sustainability
reportingstandard-setting:aEuropeanperspective.SustainAccountManagPolicyJ13(6):1284–
1309. https://doi.org/10.1108/SAMPJ-06-2021-0222
An Agenda for Research on Sustainability Reporting: Europe and Beyond
649
Grabs S, Stuchtey S (2023) Comment: why Europe’s new reporting standards could be a game-
changer for nature, Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/sustainability/sustainable-ﬁnance-rep
orting/comment-why-europes-new-reporting-standards-could-be-game-changer-nature-2023-
05-18/
IFRS Foundation (2020) Consultation Paper on Sustainability Reporting. https://www.ifrs.org/con
tent/dam/ifrs/project/sustainability-reporting/consultation-paper-on-sustainability-reporting.
pdf
IFRS Foundation (2022a) ISSB delivers proposals that create comprehensive global baseline
ofsustainabilitydisclosures.https://www.ifrs.org/news-and-events/news/2022/03/issb-delivers-
proposals-that-create-comprehensive-global-baseline-of-sustainability-disclosures/
IFRS Foundation (2022b) IFRS Foundation and GRI to align capital market and multi-stakeholder
standards to create an interconnected approach for sustainability disclosures. https://www-
ifrs-org.translate.goog/news-and-events/news/2022/03/ifrs-foundation-signs-agreement-with-
gri/?_x_tr_sl=en&_x_tr_tl=de&_x_tr_hl=de&_x_tr_pto=tc
International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) (2023) IOSCO endorses the ISSB’s
Sustainability-related Financial Disclosures Standards, IOSCO/MR/19/2023
Kinderman D (2020) The challenges of upward regulatory harmonization: the case of sustainability
reporting in the European Union. Regul Gov 14(4):674–697. https://doi.org/10.1111/rego.12240
Korca B, Costa E, Bouten L (2023) Disentangling the concept of comparability in sustainability
reporting. Sustain Account Manag Policy J 14(4):815–851. https://doi.org/10.1108/SAMPJ-05-
2022-0284
KPMG (2022) Big shifts, small steps: survey of sustainability reporting 2022. https://assets.kpmg.
com/content/dam/kpmg/se/pdf/komm/2022/Global-Survey-of-Sustainability-Reporting-2022.
pdf
Larrinaga C, Bebbington J (2021) The pre-history of sustainability reporting: a constructivist
reading. Account Auditing Accountability J 34(9):162–181. https://doi.org/10.1108/AAAJ-03-
2017-2872
Liu M, Tang J, Walton S, Zhang Y, Zhao X (2023) Auditor sustainability focus and client
sustainability reporting. Acc Organ Soc. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aos.2023.101512
Marquis C, Toffel MW, Zhou Y (2016) Scrutiny, norms, and selective disclosure: a global study of
greenwashing. Organ Sci 27(2):233–504. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.2015.1039
Migliorelli M (2021) What do we mean by sustainable ﬁnance? assessing existing frameworks and
policy risks. Sustainability 13:975. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13020975
Mirchandani B (2021) The biggest change in corporate reporting since the 1930s: How to read
IFRS prototype sustainability and climate standards, Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/bha
ktimirchandani/2021/11/04/the-biggest-change-in-corporate-reporting-since-the-1930s-how-
to-read-ifrs-prototype-sustainability-and-climate-standards/?sh=43bf52af7327
Ohl A, Horn H, Wieman V (2022) Navigating the ESG landscape: comparison of the
“Big Three” Disclosure Proposals, Harvard Law School Forum on Corporate Gover-
nance, https://corpgov.law.harvard.edu/2022/10/10/navigating-the-esg-landscape-comparison-
of-the-big-three-disclosure-proposals/
Pesci C, Vola P, Gelmini L (2023) Flattening or addressing complexity? the future role of GRI in light
of the sustainability accounting (r)evolution. Sustain Account Manag Policy J 14(4):792–814.
https://doi.org/10.1108/SAMPJ-05-2022-0287
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) (2022) Fact sheet: enhancement and standardization
of climate-related disclosures. https://www.sec.gov/ﬁles/33-11042-fact-sheet.pdf
Sheldon MD, Jenkins JG (2020) The inﬂuence of ﬁrm performance and (level of) assurance on
the believability of management’s environmental report. Account Auditing Accountability J
33(3):501–528. https://doi.org/10.1108/AAAJ-11-2018-3726
Simnet R, Vanstraelen A, Chua WF (2009) Assurance of sustainability reports: an international
comparison. Account Rev 84(3):937–967. https://doi.org/10.2308/accr.2009.84.3.937
650
J. Baumüller et al.
Spandel T, Oll J, Schiemann F, Akkermann J (2023) Materiality as an essentially contested concept:
pathways forward for sustainability disclosure research. SSRN, https://ssrn.com/abstract=432
3836 or https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4323836
Stolowy H, Paugam L (2023) Sustainability reporting: is convergence possible? Account Europe
20(2):139–165. https://doi.org/10.1080/17449480.2023.2189016
Thompson EK, Ashimwe O, Buertey S, Kim S-Y (2022) The value relevance of sustainability
reporting: does assurance and the type of assurer matter? Sustain Account Manag Policy J
13(4):858–877. https://doi.org/10.1108/SAMPJ-08-2021-0329
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) (2015) Raising the bar on corporate sustainability
reporting to meet ecological challenges globally. https://www.unep.org/news-and-stories/press-
release/raising-bar-corporate-sustainability-reporting-meet-ecological
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) (2019) Corporate sustainability reporting
toolkit–enhancing the uptake and impact of corporate sustainability reporting: a handbook
and toolkit for policymakers and relevant stakeholders, section a–background to sustain-
ability reporting. https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/30663/CSRHdb.pdf?
sequence=1&isAllowed=y
Vigneau L, Adams CA (2023) The failure of transparency as self-regulation. Sustain Account Manag
Policy J 14(4):852–876. https://doi.org/10.1108/SAMPJ-01-2022-0051
Villiers C (2022) New directions in the european union’s regulatory framework for corporate
reporting, due diligence and accountability: the challenge of complexity. Euro J Risk Regul
13(4):548–566. https://doi.org/10.1017/err.2022.25
Wagenhofer A (2024) Sustainability reporting: a ﬁnancial reporting perspective. Account Europe
21(1):1–13. https://doi.org/10.1080/17449480.2023.2218398
Willems M (2023) Opinion: big four-led ESG reporting is outright dangerous and ‘an accident
waitingtohappen’.https://esginsight.org/opinion-big-four-led-esg-reporting-is-outright-danger
ous-and-an-accident-waiting-to-happen/
Zetzsche DA, Anker-Sørensen L (2022) Regulating sustainable ﬁnance in the dark. Euro Bus Organ
Law Rev 23(1):47–85. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40804-021-00237-9
Making Education for Sustainable
Development (ESD) More Inclusive
and Engaging Through Universal Design
for Learning (UDL): A Case Study
at the Westminster Business School
Gustavo R. Espinoza-Ramos
Abstract There is a growing effort to embed sustainability in higher education
curricula through the application of the United Nations’ Sustainable Development
Goals (SDG). However, this process faces different challenges, including a lack of
student engagement due to an emphasis on traditional teaching approaches. To over-
come these challenges and improve Education for Sustainable Development (ESD),
there is a need for alternative teaching methods and innovative forms of assessment.
Universal Design for Learning (UDL) is an educational framework aimed at teaching
and learning being more inclusive and transformative for students of all abilities, thus
promoting an inclusive sustainable education (SDG4). The studies on UDL have
been increasing in the last decade; however, there is a gap in the literature around
the application of UDL to the curriculum and evidence regarding its impact. This
chapter showcases the application of UDL principles in the design of Sustainable City
Economies (SCE), a second-year undergraduate module at the Westminster Business
School. This case study shows how providing different learning spaces, including
on-campus classes, ﬁeld trips (walking or virtual tours), online learning material and
assessment methods that meet students’ learning preferences and improve student
agency in their learning. In sum, the learning material and assessment are aligned
with the UDL principles of action and expression, representation, and engagement.
Keywords Business · Universal Design for Learning (UDL) · Education for
Sustainable Development (ESD) · Problem-Based Learning (PBL) · Inclusivity
G. R. Espinoza-Ramos (B)
Westminster Business School, SFHEA, London, England
e-mail: g.espinozaramos@westminster.ac.uk
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_36
651
652
G. R. Espinoza-Ramos
1
Introduction
The transition to becoming a sustainable society requires the participation of different
groups of stakeholders, who will identify, evaluate and adopt new daily practices
in different sectors, including extractive industries, manufacturing, retail and tech-
nology. Education has been one of the key sectors setting the foundations for sustain-
able practices. For this reason, in recent decades, there has been a growing effort to
embed sustainability in higher education curricula (Lozano et al. 2015), recognising
the need for students not only to be aware of sustainability issues, but also, to develop
a set of competencies that will help them to address current socio-environmental and
economic challenges.
Initiatives to embed sustainability in the curricula have been growing at a fast
pace in recent years (Fekih Zguir et al. 2021). However, further research is required
when embedding sustainability in universities’ activities (Leal Filho et al. 2019).
This gap in the research is due to a low integration of sustainable development in
the transformation of higher education, and the lack of connection between learning
and teaching, research and governance (Leal Filho et al. 2019).
To promote sustainable development in education, UNESCO developed the
Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) in 1992 (Rieckmann 2017). ESD
is an initiative that supports educators and policymakers in higher education, which
requires innovative teaching methods and assessments to meet different learning pref-
erences according to students’ abilities (Rieckmann 2017). When designing these
teaching methods, a key question that an educator should reﬂect on is to what extent
the learning activities related to sustainability are inclusive. The solution requires the
development of a learning environment and methods that are transformative (Leal
Filho et al. 2019), decolonised, co-created and integrate diverse ways to develop and
express knowledge (Ferguson et al. 2022).
Fisher and McAdams (2015) argue that every higher education institution should
develop their own model when embedding sustainability in the curricula. For that
reason, this case study endeavours to ﬁll the research gap by providing an overview
of Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) and the principles of Universal
Design for Learning (UDL). It details how both were embedded when developing
inclusive and sustainable learning activities in Sustainable City Economies (SCE),
a second-year undergraduate module at the Westminster Business School (United
Kingdom). The chapter aims to give practical advice on the structure of learning
activities, teaching tools and assessments that can be applied to other disciplines.
2
Methodology
This case study applies autoethnography as a qualitative research methodology, for
which the researcher reﬂects on personal experiences and his position in the study to
analyse cultural experiences, beliefs, and practices (Adams et al. 2017). According
Making Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) More Inclusive …
653
to Koopman et al. (2020), autoethnography enhances reﬂexivity and critical thinking
as the researcher engages emotionally and cognitively during the analysis of the
subjective experience (Peterson 2015). As autohemotherapy allows researchers to
explore their own personal experiences as a source of knowledge and insight, it
promotes a deeper understanding of different factors of culture and interpersonal
dynamics in varied locations such as organisations (Edwards 2021).
In this case study, autoethnography has been selected as the best ﬁt methodology
to understand the module leader’s experiences when designing Sustainable City
Economies (SCE), a second-year undergraduate module at the Westminster Busi-
ness School (England). Moreover, the case study showcases the process of embed-
ding ESD in a module that has more than 340 students enrolled since its creation in
the academic year 2021/2022.
3
Education for Sustainable Development (ESD)
The concept of Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) has its origins in
the 1990s, through early discussions in conferences organised by United Nations
in acknowledgement of the importance of raising awareness and developing educa-
tion initiatives on sustainable development. This was demonstrated in 1994 when
UNESCO developed the Environment and Population Education and Information
for Human Development Project, known as EPD. Later, in 1997, the name was
changed to Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) in an attempt to clarify
its purpose (York University 2023).
EducationforSustainableDevelopment(ESD)isaprocessoflearningthatenables
students to develop the values, knowledge and competencies needed to address
the current local and global challenges (UNESCO 2023). Moreover, it endeavours
to harmonise socio-economic interests with cultural traditions and environmental
protection (Afolabi 2019). To achieve this, ESD seeks to develop student agency so
that learners are accountable for their actions and empowered to develop solutions
to the current sustainability issues.
DespitethenoblecommitmentofESDtowardsequippingstudentswiththeknowl-
edge and skills needed to work and live in a way that safeguards environmental,
social and economic wellbeing, embedding it in the curricula has been challenging.
According to the Calvert et al. (2023), some barriers include scarce understanding
and application of ESD in learning activities and assessment, resistance to change,
no clear policy and procedure to apply it as well as lack of time and ﬁnancial
resources. To overcome these barriers, adopting a holistic and systematic approach
to ESD, involving leadership, pedagogy, research, and quality assurance procedures
is recommended (Lozano et al. 2015; Leal Filho et al. 2019).
654
G. R. Espinoza-Ramos
3.1
Pedagogical Approach
Embedding ESD in the curricula of all disciplines requires a multi-method peda-
gogical approach that develops interactive, experiential, and transformative learning
(Lozano et al. 2017). Moreover, some student-activating methods that support under-
standing and ﬁnding solutions to sustainability issues can be developed inside and
outside the classroom. Ceulemans and De Prins (2010) identiﬁed the following
methods for use in the classroom: videos, case studies, presentations, jigsaw, business
challenges, discussion, and voting. Meanwhile, some learning activities developed
outside the classroom include ﬁeld trips, excursions, and visiting exhibitions.
ESD guidelines do not prescribe a unique pedagogical approach that is applicable
to all disciplines. Instead, the pedagogy that ﬁts with ESD is the one that connects
learning with the students’ contexts and real-life problems (Rieckmann 2017), such
that they are familiar with the learning spaces and encourage class participation
when ﬁnding solutions to sustainability challenges. Some pedagogical approaches
to meet the above aims have been deemed to include problem-based learning and
project-based learning.
4
Problem-Based Learning (PBL)
The term Problem-based Learning was originated in 1974 by Howard Barrows as
an innovative approach in medical education (Neufeld and Barrows 1974), and then
it has been used in other disciplines, including engineering, psychology, economics
and education (Servant-Miklos 2020). PBL is seen as a teaching and learning strategy
in which students are responsible for their own learning, work in small groups and
undertakeresearchtoﬁndalltheinformationrequiredtosolvearealproblem(Tejedor
et al. 2019). During this process, ﬁnding the solution is not the key outcome; it is
the process of ﬁnding the solutions, including social interaction and understanding
the challenges and constraints that are the key part of their learning (Nurtanto et al.
2020).
PBL has been implemented in different disciplines in higher education when
students solve sustainability issues. For example, when engineering students solve
socio-environmental issues (Hansen and Gonzalez 2014); and when management
students work in partnership with companies to improve their sustainability perfor-
mance in waste management and adoption of renewable energy (Wiek et al.
2014).
Making Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) More Inclusive …
655
5
Project-Based Learning (PjBL)
Project-based learning is a teaching and learning method that has originated from the
constructivism theories since the 1960s (Aldabbus 2018) and has been implemented
in educational institutions worldwide (Pereira et al. 2017). According to Guo et al.
(2020) PjBL involves the following activities: identiﬁcation of a real problem, formu-
lation of a question, collaboration in teams, use of scaffolding technologies and the
creation of tangible artefacts. It is the development of artefacts, the key difference
that distinguishes PjBL from PBL and other teaching and learning methods (Guo
et al. 2020).
Research has demonstrated that PjBL develops key capabilities in higher educa-
tion students, including critical thinking, problem-solving, interpersonal communi-
cation, teamwork, innovation, and creativity (Häkkinen et al. 2017). For that reason,
the application of PjBL in higher education has been growing. For example, PjBL
has been applied in engineering studies (De Los Ríos et al. 2010) and when ﬁnding
solutions to sustainability issues and circular economy (Alves et al. 2017).
5.1
Aligning Learning Outcomes with Key Competencies
for Sustainability
When embedding sustainability in courses, it is important to align the course/module
learning outcomes to ESD to identify its purpose and ensure its alignment with
the learning activities and assessment. UNESCO has developed key competencies
for sustainability aimed at all learners of all ages worldwide that encapsulate the
knowledge, skills, and attitudes that students need to address socio-environmental
issues at local and global levels. These competencies can be aligned with the learning
outcomes of which there are eight that are divided into three categories (QAA and
Advance HE 2021).
Ways of thinking
• Systems thinking competency: The ability to understand how a problem is
composed by a complex system, their interconnections, and their causes and
effects.
• Anticipatory competency (Future thinking): The ability to understand, anticipate
and evaluate current and future challenges as well as the potential consequences
of their actions and their contribution to a sustainable future.
• Critical thinking competency: The ability to conceptualise, apply, analyse, synthe-
sise, and evaluate information and arguments. Moreover, learners will be able
to recognise their own personal assumptions and values that inﬂuence their
behaviour.
656
G. R. Espinoza-Ramos
Ways of practising
• Strategic competency: The ability to develop and implement strategies to solve
sustainability issues. This competency includes goal setting, time and resource
management, implementation of solutions, and stakeholder management.
• Collaboration competency: The ability to develop communication, group manage-
ment, and self-awareness skills to work ethically and professionally with others
to achieve common goals.
• Integrated problem-solving competency: The ability to develop and apply multi-
disciplinary and interdisciplinary knowledge to address different and conﬂicting
priorities when aiming to solve complex real problems.
Ways of being
• Self-awareness competency: The ability to reﬂect on one’s own emotions, moti-
vations and personality that have an impact on behaviours so that learners develop
a sense of agency and responsibility to develop sustainable solutions.
• Normative competency: The ability to understand and reﬂect their own norms and
values that shape their behaviours. Moreover, by understanding justice, equity,
inclusion and responsibility, learners are able to identify biases and barriers to
sustainable solutions.
The alignment of the UNESCO’s key competencies for sustainability with the
learning outcomes will shape the course/module design. The next steps include
the development of the learning environment, activities and assessment, which
will stimulate the development of these competencies in an inclusive way. The
Universal Design for Learning (UDL) is the framework that can effectively guide
the development of these learning spaces.
6
Universal Design for Learning (UDL)
Universal Design for Learning (UDL) is a framework for teaching and learning
design that has gained prominence since the 1990s. It focuses on reducing barriers in
the learning environment so that a higher diversity of learners can engage in rigorous
and meaningful learning (CAST 2023a). It provides an educational framework in
which the educational curriculum, procedures and content are not a one-size-ﬁts-all
learner approach.
The concept of Universal Design (UD) originated in 1970s, in the ﬁeld of archi-
tecture and is generally credited to the work of Ronald Mace, who envisioned the
universal design of buildings that are accessible for anyone, including disabled people
(Unluol Unal et al. 2022). Then, in 1990s, the concept of universal design was
adapted to learning by The Center for Applied Special Technology (CAST), such
that the learning environment, by acknowledging that students come from different
backgrounds, and have different abilities and learning preferences (Almumen 2020).
Hence, UDL suggests a change in the curricula so that students have multiple options
Making Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) More Inclusive …
657
to access and interact with the learning material and express knowledge in multiple
ways.
The application of UDL in curriculum design has been growing over the years as
it provides different beneﬁts, including a reduction of the attainment gap in higher
education, especially after Covid 19 pandemic (Luke 2021), mitigation of student
discouragement, insecurity and isolation during their studies as well as improvement
in student learning, outcomes, engagement and satisfaction (Hills et al. 2022).
6.1
Principles of UDL
UDL comprises three core principles, nine guidelines and 31 checkpoints that guide
the design and implementation of the learning objectives, activities, instructional
materials, and assessment.
Multiple means of representation:
• It implies the development of course material in multiple formats, where learners
have different ways to access, process, and comprehend learning content. There-
fore, there is not one way of representing learning material that is optimal for all
learners. For example, the learning material should be provided in visual, audi-
tory and written ways to support learning (CAST 2023b). Providing options for
representation in different formats, such as videos, audio recordings, text, graphs,
and other multimedia, will support students in developing connections between
new information and previous experiences.
• This principle has three guidelines and checkpoints that guide its application:
perception, language and symbols, and comprehension.
Multiple means of action and expression:
• This principle involves the development of alternative ways in which students can
express their understanding and opinion about the content. Moreover, students can
express themselves in writing, verbally, through social interactions, individual or
group work and plenary sessions. For example, students can use multimedia and
assistive technology to plan and organise learning material in incremental and
multimodal formats or use online whiteboards and presentation tools to demon-
strate their understanding of the lessons. In addition, some assessment methods
include interviews, podcasts, quiz/test, posters, graphs, presentations, reports/
essays (Al-Azawei et al. 2016).
• This principle has three guidelines and checkpoints that guide its application:
physical action, expression and communication, and executive functions.
Multiple means of engagement:
• Students have different ways to engage and motivations to learn. Accordingly, this
principle involves offering different choices of content modality to encourage
students to become involved in the learning activities. Instructors can develop
658
G. R. Espinoza-Ramos
learning material that is linked to real-life situations and students’ interests and
motivation (Luke 2021) to improve their engagement. Moreover, this engagement
process can involve the use of social interactions with their peers or self-reﬂection.
For example, developing a safer learning environment and giving the students the
autonomy to choose the artefacts they can use to learn and express knowledge,
will improve engagement.
• This principle has three guidelines and checkpoints that guide its application:
recruiting interest, sustaining effort and persistence, and self-regulation.
The application of Universal Design for Learning (UDL) principles will support
embedding sustainability in the curricula by offering different learning spaces,
modes, activities and assessments through which students can gain and express
knowledge that is suitable for all abilities and backgrounds. The following section
shows the practical application of ESD and UDL in higher education, by sharing
good practices when developing the learning outcomes, activities and assessment.
7
Sustainable City Economies
Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) has been applied at the University
of Westminster through the development of core modules that are focussed on
sustainability. For example, Sustainable City Economies is a second-year under-
graduate module at the Westminster Business School that has been delivered since
the academic year 2021/2022. The module aims to provide students with theoretical
and practical knowledge regarding sustainable cities, developing a critical under-
standing of the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) and reﬂecting on the
role of stakeholders as well as their own when achieving a sustainable city.
In addition, the principles of Universal Design for Learning (UDL) were applied
as a pedagogical framework to develop an inclusive learning environment, material,
and assessment that is meaningful to their learning preferences. The application of
ESD and UDL principles in this module was done through the following stages,
including the development of the learning outcomes, selection of pedagogy, presen-
tation of learning material, assessment opportunities, student engagement spaces
and co-design of the module with the students. Table 1 shows a summary of the
application of UDL principles in the module.
7.1
Development of Module Learning Outcomes
First, the development of four learning outcomes (LOs) aligned with UNESCO’s key
competencies for sustainability to determine the purpose and competencies devel-
oped when completing the module. The LOs shaped the development of the learning
Making Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) More Inclusive …
659
Table 1 Application of UDL in sustainable city economies
Activity
Type
Multiple means of
action and
expression
Multiple means of
representation
Multiple means of
engagement
Learning
material
Lecture
Students can learn
in big groups
PowerPoint slides can
be downloaded in
different formats
(video, HTML, PDF,
etc.)
Students can attend the
live lecture or watch the
video recording
Plenary discussion
Live session that is
video recorded and
includes
transcriptions
The examples provided
are from developed and
developing countries
Short video clips
(with captions) and
Q&A
Some students are very
competitive when
engaging in the PE
competitions
Poll Everywhere
Competitions
(formative
assessment)
Plenary discussion
Seminar
Students can learn
in small groups
PowerPoint slides can
be downloaded in
different formats
(video, HTML, PDF,
etc.)
The examples provided
are from developed and
developing countries
Individual, small
group activity and
plenary session
Case study: written or
in video format (with
captions) and Q&A
Some students can share
their opinions
individually or in small
groups
Use of online
whiteboard (padlet)
or ﬂipchart paper
Some students can share
their views verbally
(discussion) or in
written format (online
whiteboard)
Use of online games
(individual)
Students like to use their
mobile phones or
laptops when playing
the online games
Individual, small
group activity and
plenary session
Assessment
Poster
Visual learners
Students can
represent knowledge
in a visual way
Student can choose the
city of their preference
from a sustainability
ranking
Student can choose the
two sustainability issues
to analyse:
environmental or social
(continued)
660
G. R. Espinoza-Ramos
Table 1 (continued)
Activity
Type
Multiple means of
action and
expression
Multiple means of
representation
Multiple means of
engagement
Student can choose the
root cause analysis tool
(ﬁshbone or 5 whys)
Report
Reading/writing
learner
Students can
represent knowledge
in a written way
Students can choose the
sustainable solutions to
analyse
Students can choose the
key learning in their
reﬂection on the ﬁeld
trip experience
Students can analyse
their own role in
promoting sustainability
Field trip
Walking
tour
Interpersonal
learner
Students can
represent knowledge
through an outdoor
learning activity
Students can attend the
tour four different times
in week 6
Virtual
tour
Intrapersonal
learner
Students can
represent knowledge
through an online
activity
Students can attend the
virtual tour at any time
for one week
Guest
lecture
Q&A—summary
of ﬁeld trip
ﬁndings
Students can
consolidate their
knowledge from the
outdoor or online
activity
Students can attend the
live session or watch the
video recoding
activities and were assigned to a speciﬁc assessment component to avoid their over-
assessment. In addition, the LOs guided the application of the UDL principles as they
were embedded in the learning material, activities and assessment. Table 2 shows
the alignment of the LOs, key competencies for sustainability and assessment.
7.2
Selection of Pedagogy
Second, the LOs and key competencies for sustainability supported the identiﬁcation
of the pedagogy suitable to achieve them. In this case, problem-based learning (PBL)
was selected as the main pedagogy, where students were able to develop critical
analysis when evaluating the two sustainability issues, evaluating their causes and
impact and when developing solutions to these real-world problems. In addition,
the application of PBL in the module improved student agency in that they became
Making Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) More Inclusive …
661
Table 2 Learning outcomes, key competencies and assessment
Learning outcome
Key competency
Assessment
LO1. Selects appropriate techniques for evaluation
and discriminate between the various forms of
evidence collected aimed at investigating the impact
of businesses and governmental structures in cities
on economic development, environment and social
equity
Critical thinking
competency
Assessment 1:
Poster
LO2. Adapts research, analysis, and communication
skills to raise awareness of sustainability issues in
the city to a range of situations, audiences and
degrees of complexity
Collaboration
competency
Assessment 1:
Poster
LO3. Collects and synthesises information from a
range of authoritative sources to inform a choice of
solutions to sustainability problems in familiar and
unfamiliar contexts of various cities around the
world
Integrated
problem-solving
competency
Assessment 2:
Report
LO4. Analyses performance of self and others in
promoting a sustainable city and suggests
improvements
Self-awareness
competency
Assessment 2:
Report
increasingly independent of the lecturer and gained more responsibility for their own
learning. Therefore, PBL supports the development of the UNESCO’s competencies
for sustainability, especially in terms of critical thinking, integrated problem-solving,
and self-awareness.
7.3
Presentation of Learning Material
Third, developing and presenting learning material in a range of modalities was
important to cater for the different student learning abilities and preferences as it facil-
itated students to process and understand the concepts covered in the module. More-
over, providing students with various ways to access and engage with learning mate-
rial supports the application of the UDL principle: Multiple means of representation,
especially guideline 1—perception, and guideline 3—comprehension. Speciﬁcally,
the range of modalities in the learning material includes the following.
• PowerPoint slides used in lectures and seminars to present information and
instructions to students; the virtual learning environment (VLE) used at the
university allowed students to download alternative document versions, such as
downloadablePDFﬁles,HTML,audio,electronicbrailleandanimmersivereader.
• Videos with captions were used in some learning activities, where students had
to answer questions. The length of the videos varied from three to eight minutes.
662
G. R. Espinoza-Ramos
• The two-hour live lectures were recorded; the captions were automatically
embedded by the university video platform. In addition, a mic was used to improve
the sound quality during the live lecture and when watching the video recording.
• Reading list: physical and electronic versions of the essential and further reading
were available for students.
7.4
Assessment Opportunities
Fourth, the development of assessment opportunities for students was critical for
measuring the extent of their learning and evaluating their level of understanding. In
this module, formative and summative assessments were implemented. The former
is not graded, permits the lecturer to identify concepts that need clariﬁcation and
takes the form of ongoing feedback that will prepare students for the summative
assessment. Summative assessment counts towards the ﬁnal module grade and is
used to evaluate student learning carried out at the end or at a speciﬁc time of the
module. Giving students the option to express knowledge differently is aligned with
the UDL principle: multiple means of action and expression, especially guideline 4—
physical action; and guideline 5—expression and communication. In this module,
the range of assessment opportunities includes the following.
Summative assessment: two different assessment components were designed so
that students can demonstrate knowledge according to their learning preferences.
Moreover, within each assessment component, students could choose the concepts
and tools to apply.
• Assessment 1 was an individual poster that permitted a visual representation of
knowledge. In this assignment, students could choose:
• The city of their preference from a sustainable city ranking that shows 100 cities.
• Two Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) that complement SDG 11: sustain-
able cities and communities.
• The two sustainability issues that they wanted to analyse, which could be social
or environmental ones.
• The root cause analysis tool that helped them to identify the underlying causes of
the two sustainability issues.
• Assessment 2 was a report through which students could express knowledge in a
written way. In this assignment, they could choose:
• A different city than in assessment 1 (poster), as some were unable to ﬁnd more
information to complete the other sections of the assessment.
• Two solutions to address sustainability issues.
• To reﬂect on two solutions that they experienced during the ﬁeld trip, regardless
of whether they completed the walking or online tour.
Formative assessment: the seminar learning activities required students to answer
some questions based on a case study or short video. Then students had to discuss
Making Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) More Inclusive …
663
their answers in groups or individually as well as expressing their knowledge using
different tools.
• Flip chart papers and markers; or a padlet, an online whiteboard on which students
can use an electronic device such as a mobile phone or laptop. In both cases,
students had the opportunity to contribute and share their ideas in a written form.
• Short presentations through which students could verbally express their ﬁndings
from their ﬂipchart papers or padlets.
7.5
Opportunities for Engagement
Fifth, as students have different motivations when learning, offering different oppor-
tunities to interact with the learning material and information was important. More-
over, student engagement varies according to the learning activity (individual or
group work) as well as their afﬁnity with the examples used in class, during outdoor
activities and the type of technology. Giving different spaces so that students engage
in the activities is related to the UDL principle: multiple means of engagement, espe-
cially with the guideline 7—recruiting interest; and guideline 8—sustaining effort
and persistence. In this module, the different learning opportunities such that students
could engage included the following.
• Examples and case studies: Those used in the lecture and seminars are from devel-
oped and developing countries. In addition, giving the options to select between
social or environmental issues contributes to student engagement.
• Individual and group work: During seminars some activities included individual
and group work, for which they needed to answer questions based on a short case
study or video. These activities promoted collaboration, improved their social
skills, in particular, shy students tended to participate more when working in
small groups, rather than in the plenary.
• Online games: During the lectures, a Poll Everywhere competition was used,
where students had to answer multiple-choice questions in an online quiz that
brought out the participants’ competitive side as they competed for points and
they could see their names on the leaderboard after each question. In addition,
in two seminars, a different free online game was used so that students could
compete against each other when developing solutions to sustainability issues.
• Outdoor learning: a ﬁeld trip was organised so that students could explore sustain-
ability issues and solutions in London. The ﬁeld trip was organised in week 6 and
in two modalities, such that they could choose according to their learning prefer-
ence: walking or virtual tour. In week 7, the tour guide was a guest speaker and
shared the key ﬁndings of the ﬁeld trip so that all students had a summary of the
key learning during this experience.
664
G. R. Espinoza-Ramos
7.6
Co-Design of Module with Students
Sixth, students became key partners in module design as they had opportunities to
have their voices heard in written and verbal ways during the semester. This practice
provides different beneﬁts, such as developing learner-centred courses and enhancing
the student sense of belonging in the module. The participation of students in module
design contributes to all the principles of UDL and in this module, it was implemented
in the following ways.
• Student reps: Every seminar group selected a student rep who was responsible
for listening, gathering and communicating the views of all about good practices
and positive changes aimed at improving the student learning experience, which
included: learning material, student–teacher dynamics, and assessment support.
There were two meetings during the semester that helped the module leader to
identify areas for improvement, which were subsequently acted upon.
• Feedback on the ﬁeld trip: Students had the opportunity to complete a feedback
form on their learning experience during the ﬁeld trip, such that good practice and
areas for improvement were identiﬁed for improving this activity.
• Student Module Evaluation (SME) form: The students had the chance to provide
written, anonymous feedback about the module, learning materials, teaching
support and assessment. They had seven weeks to complete this form and this
helped the module leader identify good practices and areas for improvement.
In addition, students could communicate with the module and seminar leaders
through different channels and opportunities during the semester.
• Communication channels: Students could raise questions, give feedback and
ﬂag up concerns using the electronic discussion board, emails (university email
address or messages through the VLE), one-to-one meetings and during classes.
7.7
Impact of ESD and UDL
Since the academic year 2021/2022, when the Sustainable City Economies module
was delivered, the impact of embedding ESD and UDL principles has been noticeable
indifferentareas,includingassessmentgrades,studentmoduleevaluationandwritten
feedback.
Assessment grades
The average grades in both assessment components have been increasing throughout
the academic years. For example, in the ﬁrst academic year, students demonstrated
concerns related to the lower assessment 1 grades. For that reason, in the following
academicyears,moresupportwasgiventopreparethemfortheassessment,including
Q&A sessions to help them have a better understanding of the assessment brief;
seminar learning activities linked to a speciﬁc section of each assessment; formative
Making Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) More Inclusive …
665
feedback on their assessment drafts; and the use of the discussion board on which
students could share their questions about the assessment. This support and having
a different non-traditional type of assessment, in this case a poster, had a positive
impact on written feedback:
“I enjoyed the poster (CW1) and it should be kept in for future years” and “I like that the
assignments allow you to be creative and the ﬁeld trip was also a good activity”.
Field trip
Having an outdoor learning activity contributes to the learning experience of some
students. Since the academic year 2021/2022, there has been a clear trend in the
student’s preference for attending the virtual tour (60%) rather than the walking one
(40%). This could be related to factors including weather conditions, family/work
commitments, and students’ preferences to engage more through online activities,
rather than on-campus ones. Regardless of the modality of the ﬁeld trip, students
gave positive feedback:
“I mostly liked going on the sustainable London walking tour ﬁeldtrip”; “Loved that it was
possible to take the tour online, as I had no chance of participating in the tour in London”;
and “I liked the lecture materials and also liked the practical application through the ﬁeld
trip”.
Student Module valuation (SME)
The SME results are steady at around 4.2/5. The written feedback shows diverse
opinions about learning sustainability in business studies, with some students ﬁnding
it challenging and not considering it a being related to business. However, there are
others who enjoyed the module content and assignments. Every academic year, more
examples of sustainable business practices have been embedded in the module, which
may have enhanced student learning experience. Related to UDL, students enjoyed
the choice of assessment that improved their agency in their own learning. In addition,
some students enjoyed the fact that in this module only classes in weeks 6 and 12
were online, as they reported how they struggled to engage in online learning.
“I really enjoyed this module, it was probably my favourite of this semester”; “I like that I had
a lot of choice when it came to assessments - I could choose the city, problems, solutions”;
and “The fact that we only had online lessons due to either the ﬁeld trip or strikes on the
tube was the best way to apply them and the only way that I ﬁnd acceptable”.
8
Further Research
This chapter contributes to the literature on Education for Sustainable Development
(ESD) and Universal Design for Learning (UDL) by presenting a case study that
applied both concepts in module design that will guide other practitioners in higher
education. However, there are some areas that need further research.
666
G. R. Espinoza-Ramos
In the case of ESD, there is a need to investigate further the application of ESD in
general management studies, especially in the ﬁeld of logistics (Putz et al. 2018). In
addition, there is a need to improve the understanding of how pedagogical approaches
have an impact on sustainability competencies (Lozano et al. 2017). In addition, the
pedagogical approaches of ESD require further evaluation.
Whilst the literature on the application of UDL in higher education has been
increasing, there remains a need for additional research on its application in the
business studies context. According to Unluol Unal et al. (2022), there are scarce
studies on the effectiveness of UDL training when developing lesson plans, especially
when analysing the impact on populations from different backgrounds.
In addition, there is a need to research the implementation of UDL at the university
level (Hills et al. 2022). Meanwhile, Kennette and Wilson (2019) argue that more
research is required to understand the students’ perspectives on the level of UDL
principles applied in their courses and its impact on their learning.
9
Conclusion
This chapter contributes to the literature about the application of Education for
Sustainable Development (ESD) and principles of Universal Design for Learning
(UDL) in module design in higher education. Some of UNESCO’s key competen-
cies of sustainability were embedded in the module learning outcomes that shaped
the development of the learning activities and assessment. The three principles of
UDL were embedded in the module in different ways. The multiple means of repre-
sentation principle was demonstrated when providing multiple formats of module
material, such as lesson slides, videos with captions as well as physical and elec-
tronic versions of books. The principle of multiple means of action and expression
was demonstrated when providing assessment components that permit visual and
written ways to represent knowledge (poster and report, respectively) as well as
when students were able to express themselves in verbal ways through presentations.
The principle of multiple means of engagement was demonstrated when different
examples from developed and developing countries were used as part of the learning
material; when students engaged more in individual or group activities; and through
using online games or a ﬁeld trip that allowed students to apply concepts covered in
the class.
The results from assessment grades, student feedback, and Student Module Eval-
uation (SME) demonstrate that there is not one teaching and learning method that ﬁts
all students’ preferences. In addition, it is clear that there has been an improvement
in assessment grades, and in students’ perceptions. At the undergraduate level, the
majority of students continue to prefer to have on-campus classes and a few asyn-
chronous online learning activities. However, it is necessary to explore whether the
current rise in the cost of living may have changed this student perception. Moreover,
student agency is improved when giving options in the learning and assessment activ-
ities. For example, the ﬁeld trip and its mode of delivery (walking or online tours)
Making Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) More Inclusive …
667
provided a clear application of concepts in an outdoor learning activity. Finally,
further studies should be carried out to analyse students and lecturers’ perceptions of
the effectiveness of UDL, in particular, more research should be undertaken regarding
its application in business studies.
References
Adams TE, Ellis C, Jones SH (2017) Autoethnography. In: The international encyclopedia of
communication research methods. Wiley, pp 1–11. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1002/978
1118901731.iecrm0011
Afolabi PA (2019) Assessment of ﬁeld trip as a pedagogical strategy for teaching sustainable
development agenda at higher education level. Int J Adv Acad Res|Arts 5(5):2488–9849
Al-Azawei A, Serenelli F, Lundqvist K (2016) Universal Design for Learning (UDL): a content
analysis of peer reviewed journals from 2012 to 2015. J Sch Teach Learn 16(3):39–56. Available
at: https://doi.org/10.14434/josotl.v16i3.19295
Aldabbus S (2018) Project-based learning: implementation and challenges. Int J Educ Learn Dev
6(3):71–79. Available at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/328368222
Almumen HA (2020) Universal Design for Learning (UDL) across cultures: the application of UDL
in kuwaiti inclusive classrooms. SAGE Open 10(4):1–14. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1177/
2158244020969674
Alves AC et al (2017) Sustainability and circular economy through PBL: Engineering students
perceptions’. In: WASTES—solutions, treatments and opportunities II. CRC Press/Balkema, pp
409–415. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1201/9781315206172-64/SUSTAINABILITY-CIR
CULAR-ECONOMY-PBL-ENGINEERING-STUDENTS-PERCEPTIONS-ALVES-MOR
EIRA-LE
Brian Fisher P, McAdams E (2015) Gaps in sustainability education: The impact of higher education
coursework on perceptions of sustainability. Int J Sustain Higher Educ 16(4):407–423. Available
at: https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-08-2013-0106
Calvert A et al (2023) Barriers to embedding education for sustainable development in the
curriculum. Available at: http://go.qub.ac.uk/oa-feedback
CAST (2023a) Frequently Asked Questions. Available at: https://udlguidelines.cast.org/more/fre
quently-asked-questions#goal. Accessed 17 Dec 2023
CAST (2023b) Provide multiple means of Representation. Available at: https://udlguidelines.cast.
org/representation/?utm_source=castsite&utm_medium=web&utm_campaign=none&utm_
content=aboutudl&_gl=1*3gn5rj*_ga*NDkzOTk0NzgzLjE3MDE3ODE3MTg.*_ga_C7L
XP5M74W*MTcwMjg0MTA3Ni4xMy4xLjE3MDI4NDE2OTMuMC4wLjA.
Accessed
17
Dec 2023
Ceulemans K, De Prins M (2010) Teacher’s manual and method for SD integration in curricula. J
Clean Prod 18(7):645–651. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2009.09.014
De Los Ríos I et al (2010) Project-based learning in engineering higher education: two decades of
teaching competences in real environments. In: Procedia—social and behavioral sciences, pp
1368–1378. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2010.03.202
Edwards J (2021) Ethical autoethnography: is it possible? Int J Qual Methods 20:1–6. Available at:
https://doi.org/10.1177/1609406921995306
Fekih Zguir M, Dubis S, Koç M (2021) Embedding Education for Sustainable Development (ESD)
and SDGs values in curriculum: A comparative review on Qatar, Singapore and New Zealand.
J Clean Prod. Elsevier Ltd. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.128534
Ferguson T et al (2022) Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) Infusion Into Curricula:
inﬂuences on students understandings of sustainable development and ESD. Brock Educ J
31(2):63–84. Available at: https://journals.library.brocku.ca/brocked
668
G. R. Espinoza-Ramos
Guo P et al (2020) A review of project-based learning in higher education: Student outcomes and
measures. Int J Educ Res 102:1–13. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijer.2020.101586
HäkkinenPetal(2017)Preparingteacher-studentsfortwenty-ﬁrst-centurylearningpractices(PREP
21): a framework for enhancing collaborative problem-solving and strategic learning skills.
TeachTeachTheoryPractice23(1):25–41.Availableat:https://doi.org/10.1080/13540602.2016.
1203772
Hansen M, Gonzalez T (2014) Investigating the relationship between STEM learning principles
and student achievement in math and science. Am J Educ 120(2):139–171. Available at: https://
doi.org/10.1086/674376
Hills M, Overend A, Hildebrandt S (2022) Faculty perspectives on UDL: exploring bridges and
barriers for broader adoption in higher Education. Can J Sch Teach Learn 13(1). Available at:
https://doi.org/10.5206/cjsotlrcacea.2022.1.13588
Kennette LN, Andrew Wilson N (2019) Universal Design for Learning (UDL): student and faculty
perceptions. J Effective Teach Higher Educ 2(1):1–26
Koopman WJ, Watling CJ, LaDonna KA (2020) Autoethnography as a Strategy for Engaging in
Reﬂexivity. Global Qual Nurs Res 7. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1177/2333393620970508
Leal Filho W et al (2019) Sustainable development goals and sustainability teaching at universities:
falling behind or getting ahead of the pack? J Clean Prod 232:285–294. Available at: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.05.309
Lozano R et al (2015) A review of commitment and implementation of sustainable development in
higher education: results from a worldwide survey. J Clean Prod 108:1–18. Available at: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.09.048
Lozano R et al. (2017) Connecting competences and pedagogical approaches for sustainable
development in higher education: a literature review and framework proposal. Sustainability
(Switzerland) 9(10):1–15. Available at: https://doi.org/10.3390/su9101889
Luke K (2021) Twelve tips for designing an inclusive curriculum in medical education using
Universal Design for Learning (UDL) principles. MedEdPublish 10(1). Available at: https://
doi.org/10.15694/mep.2021.000118.1
Neufeld VR, Barrows HS (1974) The McMaster philosophy: an approach to medical education.
Acad Med 49(11):1040–1050
Nurtanto M, Fawaid M, Sofyan H (2020) Problem Based Learning (PBL) in Industry 4.0: improving
learning quality through character-based Literacy Learning and Life Career Skill (LL-LCS). In:
Journal of physics: conference series. IOP Publishing Ltd., pp 1–10. Available at: https://doi.
org/10.1088/1742-6596/1573/1/012006
Pereira MAC, Barreto MAM, Pazeti M (2017) Application of project-based learning in the ﬁrst
year of an industrial engineering program: lessons learned and challenges. Production 27:1–13.
Available at: https://doi.org/10.1590/0103-6513.223816
Peterson AL (2015) A case for the use of autoethnography in nursing research. J Adv Nurs
71(1):226–233. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1111/jan.12501
Putz LM, Treiblmaier H, Pfoser S (2018) Field trips for sustainable transport education: Impact on
knowledge, attitude and behavioral intention. Int J Logistics Manag 29(4):1424–1450. Available
at: https://doi.org/10.1108/IJLM-05-2017-0138
QAA and Advance HE (2021) Education for sustainable development guidance
Rieckmann M (2017) Education for sustainable development goals : learning objectives
Servant-Miklos V (2020) Problem-oriented project work and problem-based learning: “Mind the
gap!”. Interdisc J Problem-based Learn 14(1):1–17. Available at: https://doi.org/10.14434/ijpbl.
v14i1.28596
Tejedor G et al (2019) Didactic strategies to promote competencies in sustainability. Sustainability
11(7):1–24. Available at: https://doi.org/10.3390/su11072086
UNESCO (2023) What you need to know about education for sustainable development. Avail-
able at: https://www.unesco.org/en/education-sustainable-development/need-know. Accessed
17 Dec 2023
Making Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) More Inclusive …
669
Unluol Unal N, Karal MA, Tan S (2022) Developing Accessible Lesson Plans with Universal Design
for Learning (UDL). Int J Disabil Dev Educ 69(4):1442–1456. Available at: https://doi.org/10.
1080/1034912X.2020.1812539
Wiek A et al. (2014) Integrating problem and project-based learning into sustainability programs:
A case study on the school of sustainability at Arizona state university. Int J Sustain Higher
Educ 15(4):431–449. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-02-2013-0013
York University (2023) The story of ESD since 1992. Available at: https://www.yorku.ca/unesco
chair/research-expertise/history-of-esd/. Accessed 17 Dec 2023
Towards a Responsive Science Education
for Sustainable Development
Ian Phil Canlas
Abstract Quality Education is one of the seventeen goals of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and is recognized as a key driver of the rest of the sustain-
able development goals. Without question, science education is an essential driver
of sustainable development. Although the debate continues, there is some under-
standing that scientiﬁc literacy, including other literacies, is considered an essential
measure of quality education. Therefore, the author hypothesizes that most, if not
all, concepts and underlying principles of sustainable development and scientiﬁc
literacy are complementary. This chapter presents the current landscape of science
education in the context of sustainable development drawn from document analyses
of 183 papers extracted from the Scopus database following a document selection
criteria. By examining titles, abstracts, and objectives, key themes were identiﬁed
and presented in this chapter, including a reﬂection on gaps and opportunities in the
nexus of science education and education for sustainable development research.
Keywords Science education · Sustainable development · Scientiﬁc literacy ·
Sustainability
1
Introduction
There is a consensus about the role of quality education as a key driver in achieving all
the other sustainable development goals (SDGs) of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (which will be referred to as the Agenda in the text). With 2030 nearing,
all sectors of society, including the education sector, are pressured to hasten the
implementation of the Agenda amidst ever-changing socio-economic, political, civic,
and climatic landscapes. Aiming to contribute towards advancing the agenda for
I. P. Canlas (B)
School of Arts and Sciences, University of Central Asia, Naryn, Kyrgyz Republic
e-mail: lordphil2003@gmail.com; ian.canlas@ucentralasia.org
School of Graduate Studies, Biliran Province State University, Naval, Biliran Province,
Philippines
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_37
671
672
I. P. Canlas
sustainable research, this chapter elucidates the role of science education within the
framework of education for sustainable development (ESD). Speciﬁcally, it unveils
opportunities for research along the intersection of science education and sustainable
development.
Drawingfromexperienceandtheliterature,theauthorarguesthat,ontheonehand,
all SDGs can be genuinely understood only with strong and higher levels of scientiﬁc
literacy,therebygainingmoresigniﬁcantsupportandachieved.Ontheotherhand,the
relevance of science education can be enhanced by integrating content and principles
of sustainable development goals into existing science education frameworks and
curriculum standards.
In the last few years, an increasing number of studies have explored ESD in the
context of the different aspects of formal education systems. For example, a study
by Sonetti and colleagues (2020) explored ESD practices among Italian universities,
along with their mission statements and drivers thereto. A study by Wamsler (2020)
developed and assessed the impact of a course, Sustainability and Inner Transforma-
tion, that focuses on inner dimensions and capacities and transformation as a vehicle
for improved education for sustainability. Another study by Trott and Weinberg
(2020) examined how school children’s climate change learning inﬂuenced science
engagement, thus improving perceived relevance of and attitudes toward science.
Lastly,astudybyParryandMetzger(2023)exploredandreportedteachers’perceived
barriers in learning for sustainability, including the existence of disciplinary silos, a
focus on high-stakes assessments, and inadequate teacher professional development
for in-service and preservice teachers.
Notably, although the literature offers a number of frameworks and models,
including approaches toward relevant and responsive science education, certain
elements and underpinning principles of science education and scientiﬁc literacy
have remained relevant over time. This includes, for example, the scientiﬁc method,
the process of scientiﬁc inquiry, and views on the nature of science.
2
Scientiﬁc Literacy
Theliteratureoffersanumberofdeﬁnitionsofscientiﬁcliteracy,andanumberofdeﬁ-
nitions are relevant to the nexus of science education and ESD. An earlier work of the
United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc and Cultural Cooperation (UNESCO 1993),
Project 2000+ , is perhaps one of the earliest international declarations that recog-
nizedtheessentialroleofscientiﬁcandtechnologicalliteracyinachievingsustainable
development, calling for a science and technological education at all levels that is
responsive to the human needs in a scientiﬁc and technological society. The Organi-
sation for Economic Co-operation and Development deﬁned it as “the capacity to use
scientiﬁc knowledge, to identify questions, and to draw evidence-based conclusions
in order to understand and help make decisions about the natural world and the
changes made to it through human activity (p. 15).” The National Research Council
(cited in National Academies of Sciences, Engineerin 2016) deﬁned scientiﬁc literacy
Towards a Responsive Science Education for Sustainable Development
673
Fig. 1 The Spectrum of scientiﬁc literacy (Roberts 2007; Sjöström and Eilks 2018; Sjöström and
Talanquer 2014)
as “the knowledge and understanding of science concepts and processes required
for personal decision-making, civic and cultural affairs, and economic productivity
(p.139),” while Holbrook and Rannikamae (2007) deﬁned it as “developing the
ability to creatively utilize sound science knowledge in everyday life, or in a career,
to solve problems, make decisions, and improve quality of life (p. 1359).” Be that as it
may, upon close examination, all deﬁnitions lead to personal and societal groundings
(DeBoer 2000).
Roberts’s (2007) initial work on visions of scientiﬁc literacy, further advanced
by Sjöström and Eilks (2018), Sjöström and Talanquer (2014) with their work on
levels of humanized science education, presents a spectrum of scientiﬁc literacy as
depicted in Fig. 1.
Choi and colleagues (2011) offered reconceptualized dimensions of scientiﬁc
literacy that considered the demands of the twenty-ﬁrst century. The said dimensions
include (a) content knowledge, (b) habits of the mind, (c) character and values,
(d) science as a human endeavor, and (e) metacognition and self-direction. The
conceptualization can be visualized with ﬁve pillars; on the four corners are the
ﬁrst four dimensions, the center pillar is metacognition and self-direction, and three
layers: the bottom layer represents personal context, the middle represents societal
context, and the topmost represents global context (Choi et al. 2011).
3
Education for Sustainable Development
UNESCO (2017) described ESD as “holistic and transformational education that is
an integral part of lifelong learning and quality education, that addresses learning
content and outcomes, pedagogy and the learning environment, aimed at developing
competencies that empower individuals to reﬂect on their activities that account
their present and future social, cultural, economic, and environmental impact (p. 7).”
ESD could achieve SDGs by raising awareness of the 17 goals, promoting critical
and contextualized understanding of SDGs, and mobilizing action towards achieving
SDGs (UNESCO 2020, p. 16).
674
I. P. Canlas
Through ESD for 2030, UNESCO (2020) “aims to build a more just and sustain-
able world by strengthening ESD and contributing to the achievement of the 17
SDGs by fully integrating ESD and the 17 SDGs into policies, learning environments,
capacity-building of educators, the empowerment and mobilization of young people,
and local level action.” (p. 14). Further, UNESCO (2020) “aims to transform educa-
tion by mainstreaming ESD in education policies and frameworks of government;
provide all learners the opportunity to acquire knowledge, skills, values, and atti-
tudes needed for promoting sustainable development and achieving the 17 sustain-
able development goals through the whole-institution approach to ESD; people in
cities and communities recognize ESD as the key instrument for lifelong learning
to achieve sustainability at the local level; all educators having the opportunity to
develop capacities to foster societal transformation and sustainable future; and youth
becoming change agents and youth organizations providing ESD training for the
youth.” (pp. 22–23). UNESCO (2020) determined ﬁve priority action areas in ESD
for 2030 to include: “advancing policy by integrating ESD into global, regional, and
national policies of education and sustainable development (p. 26),” “transforming
learning environments by promoting a whole-institution approach (p. 28),” “building
capacities of “educators by providing capacity development opportunities (p. 30),”
empowering and mobilizing youth by providing opportunities for youth engagement
(p. 32),” and “accelerating local level actions by empowering local communities as
‘nodal’ platforms for all priority areas (p. 34).”
Along this line, more than a decade ago, Sleurs (2008) proposed the “Dynamic
Model of ESD Competencies in Teacher Education, identifying three competen-
cies (teaching, reﬂecting/visioning, and networking) and ﬁve domains (knowledge,
systems thinking, emotions, ethics and values, and action) (p. 54).” UNESCO (2017)
proposed three key pedagogical approaches toward ESD: a learner-centered approach
(seeing students as autonomous learners, active involvement of knowledge), action-
oriented learning (engaging in action and reﬂecting on experiences for personal
development), and transformative learning (empowering learners to question and
change the ways they see and think about the world) and a number of learning
methods (collaborative real-world projects, vision-building exercises, analysis of
complex systems, critical and reﬂective thinking activities) (p. 55).”
Bögeholz and colleagues (2014) recognized ESD’s integrative and interdisci-
plinary nature; thus, many of its elements and principles could coincide with science
education. Some studies have explored the literature landscape of science education
in the context of sustainable development, such as Maryanti and colleagues’ (2022)
work on bibliometric analysis of SDGs in science education.
Some literature associates the nexus of science education and ESD with science,
technology, and society (STS) (Martins 2013; Reis et al. 2020), science, technology,
and innovation (STI) (Gutnikov et al. 2017), science, technology, environment,
and society (Zoller 2013), trans-contextual and context-based science education
(Burns 2001; Chowdhury et al. 2020), innovative education approach (Reen et al.
2021), interdisciplinary approach (Stacchiotti et al. 2019; Türk et al. 2018), and
transdisciplinary education (Kubisch et al. 2021, 2022), among others.
Towards a Responsive Science Education for Sustainable Development
675
A very extant position paper by Kyle (2006) reﬂected on connecting science
education with sustainable development and other related social movements (e.g.,
human rights, democracy, social justice) and argued that science education has to
enable learners to understand “how the natural world works, how human and natural
systems interact, assess the status and trends of crucial natural systems and promote
a long term sustainable relationship with the natural world (p. 1).” This is supported
by Hogan and O’Flaherty (2022), who explored the nature and culture of science as an
academic discipline and its capacity to integrate ESD, suggesting greater emphasis on
inquiry-based learning, enhancing ESD themes in science modules, and the adoption
of a coherent strategy to promote ESD. Colucci-Gray and colleagues (2013) reﬂected
on epistemological and educational practices of science education for sustainability
and emphasized three key points: (a) implications of taking a sustainability view
about the knowledge process, (b) language and communication process to retrace the
connections between language and culture, and (c) teaching and learning situations
involving prospective teachers in action research contexts.
An earlier work of the author pointed out that for science education to be respon-
sive to ESD, explicit teaching and integration of the Nature of Science (NoS) (referred
to as the inherent values and assumptions of science (Lederman 1992, p. 331)) and
Science-Technology-Society (STS) (referred exploring and understanding the ways
that modern science and technology shape modern culture, values, and institutions,
as well as how modern values shape science and technology (Mansour 2009, p. 287))
must be strengthened (Canlas and Karpudewan 2020).
4
Method
This chapter reports the current research landscape and rich research opportuni-
ties in science education in the context of sustainable development. Informed by
document analysis research design, 206 documents were initially extracted from the
Scopus database for preliminary analysis on March 11, 2024. These documents were
extracted using the search key: “science education” AND “sustainable development”
from the search ﬁeld: article title, abstract, and keywords. Additionally, the search
was limited to articles (document type), English (language), and journals (source
type). After reading the extracted documents, 23 were excluded because the said
documents were not directly or indirectly related to science education and sustain-
able development, thus having a total of 183 papers that underwent further and more
detailed analysis.
The document analysis of the extracted abstract repeatedly examined the subject
of the reported study (topic, objectives, ﬁndings) and employed constant comparative
analysis until themes were established. The iterative process resulted in determining
speciﬁc sustainable development goals and sustainability competencies addressed
in science education research, including other themes that are complementary to
science education and sustainable development, such as STEM education, indige-
nous and traditional knowledges, the use of socio-scientiﬁc issues, and readiness
676
I. P. Canlas
for science education for sustainable development. The succeeding sections of this
chapter elaborate on the said themes.
5
Results
Upon close examination of studies reviewed for this chapter, ﬁve strategies/
approaches that bring together science education and ESD were identiﬁed. Firstly, the
related content and competencies of sustainable development goals are directly
addressed in the science teaching and learning process. Secondly, the association
of environmental education with science education as a response to the call for
sustainable development. Thirdly, the role of science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) education in improving quality education and as a promising
educational framework for sustainable development. Fourth, integrating indigenous
and traditional knowledge through dialogues between heterogeneous epistemolo-
gies as quality education. Lastly, the socio-scientiﬁc issues-based approach in inte-
grating ESD in teaching science and technology. These themes are elaborated in the
next subsections.
5.1
Science Education and the Sustainable Development
Goals
Quality education. There is a recognition of the role of quality education as an enabler
of all the other sustainable development. Some studies in STEM education have been
explicitly associated with quality education (Jamali et al. 2023). Moreover, Seehawer
and Breidlid (2021) suggested that heterogeneity and plurality of epistemologies and
a dialogue between them could be a platform to integrate indigenous knowledges
in science education and, therefore, an element of quality education. Hogan and
O’Flaherty (2022) explored the implications of integrating ESD into the nature and
culture of science. At the same time, Molina and colleagues (2021) compared quality
education approaches in the natural sciences curriculum guidelines between Taiwan
and Columbia.
Good health and well-being. A recent study by Beniermann and colleagues (2023)
explored the link between health education and ESD through [sleep] health literacy
in science education curricula, particularly on light pollution and sleep disruption.
A study by Arnold (2020) examined the role of science teaching and different
knowledge types in health-related decisions about non-communicable diseases.
Genderequality.Somestudiesprobeddigitalgendergapsininformationandcommu-
nication technology integration in science education (Palomares-Ruiz et al. 2020),
the existing infrastructure, and gender disparity in information and communication
Towards a Responsive Science Education for Sustainable Development
677
technology literacy, considering its impact on science education (Liu, 2024). In addi-
tion, Addabbo and colleagues (2016) dissected gender differences in international
science assessment performance.
Affordable and clean energy. Studies on affordable and clean energy were associ-
ated with using themes on clean energy to develop systems thinking skills related to
renewable energy (Abdurrahman et al. 2023), decision-making on sustainable devel-
opment issues (Şeker and Aydinli 2023), and environmental literacy associated with
hydropower and renewable energy (Wilujeng et al. 2019).
Climate action. Science education studies on climate action reported in the litera-
ture include teaching and learning interventions, such as the Heat-Cool Initiative in
STEM to improve climate literacy (Kumar et al. 2023), and experiential learning
modules on climate change and futures thinking (Levrini et al. 2021). A paper
by Kubisch and colleagues (2022) explicated quality science education for climate
action through transdisciplinary education. Dzvimbo and colleagues (2022) explored
the role of higher education institutions in climate change adaptation and disaster
risk management.
Responsible consumption and production. van Dam-Mieras and colleagues (1995)
proposed a university course on cleaner production strategies, a ﬂexible international
learning resource for sustainability and sustainable development. There is also the
work of Korte and colleagues (2023) on “Burger.i.doo”, an innovative science educa-
tional game anchored on sustainable meat consumption, and Sanders and colleagues’
(2023) work on the use of hypothetical scenarios about the seafood industry to
develop the systems thinking capacity of undergraduates. Zowada and colleagues
(2020) investigated the relevance of topics on the use of pesticides for chemistry
education and its connection with ESD. Anchored on the circular economy model,
Canino and colleagues (2021) reported a learning experience whereby teenagers
acted as science communicators to raise awareness of the sustainable use of raw
materials and increase STEM interests.
Life on land. de Freitas and da Silva Freitas (2013) explored sustainability, the
Amazonia, and the environment for science education. Meanwhile, João and
colleagues (2023) designed an in-service teacher education program through an
educational design research approach considering the 2030 Agenda for Sustain-
able Development on the theme ‘soils.’ In addition, Tarng and colleagues (2015)
proposed developing a virtual butterﬂy ecological system based on augmented reality
and mobile learning technologies to improve motivation, interest, and learning.
Meanwhile, Funa and colleagues (2022) contextualized instructional materials that
involved Pili (Canarium ovatum) and assessed students’ and teachers’ knowledge,
attitudes, and behaviors toward ESD.
Life below water. Most studies along this SDG are related to ocean literacy, such as
evaluating ocean literacy of elementary school students (Mogias et al. 2019), ways of
increasing ocean literacy of primary school students for ocean sustainability (Mokos
678
I. P. Canlas
et al. 2020), and an account of the ocean science education network for the Ocean
Decade (Scowcroft et al. 2021).
Partnershipforthegoal.Rauch(2013)reportedthedevelopmentofregionalnetworks
in education to enable sustainable development of learning. A study by Fyfe (1997)
about earth system science for the twenty-ﬁrst century acknowledges the need for
integrated teams of experts to provide the best alternatives for new development
problems. At the same time, Lees and Webb (2018) informed the development of the
Global Learning Partnership model to create shared learning opportunities between
academics and students. Lastly, Kubisch and colleagues (2021) reported a project,
Science Education for Action and Engagement Towards Sustainability, to analyze
different partnerships between schools and out-of-school institutions in European
countries.
Peace, justice, and strong institutions. Cummings and colleagues (2023) explored
the application of epistemic justice (fair treatment of individuals and groups in
knowledge-related and communicative practices) in sustainable development. Mean-
while, Tsaparlis and colleagues (2013) assessed undergraduates’ knowledge of
nuclear science in connection with civic scientiﬁc literacy in the context of world
peace and sustainable development.
Reduced inequalities. Alam (2023) investigated the question of secondary science
education becoming an elite product in emerging nations and reﬂected on sustain-
able education in the context of the millennium and sustainable development goals,
arguing that science education as an international product should be a ‘right-
based education program’ that is available to every capable student regardless of
socio-economic status.
Other related themes. Some themes were directly related to SDGs, such as those
associated with citizenship and waste management. For example, Rodríguez-Loinaz
and colleagues (2022) explored the role of citizen science as an educational tool
in promoting science learning and ESD in schools. Svyrydenko and Revin (2023)
explored how European educational systems instill values of civic engagement,
respect for others, and environmental awareness. In addition, Sauermann and
colleagues (2020) discussed the integration of citizen science and sustainability
transition, while Chowdhury and colleagues (2020) proposed addressing sustainable
development by promoting active and informed citizenry through trans-contextual
science education.
Along with waste management, Li and colleagues (2024) assessed the effect of a
chemistry lesson about take-out plastic use on attitudes and behaviors in connection
to Confucian ecological ethics. Stacchiotti and colleagues (2019) presented a didactic
activity about waste and circular economy, while Borreguero and colleagues (2018)
explored and analyzed the integration of concepts on waste within the framework of
sustainable development in the secondary education curriculum.
Towards a Responsive Science Education for Sustainable Development
679
5.2
Scientiﬁc Literacy and Sustainability Competencies
The literature on science education and ESD offers a number of studies that measure
levels and changes in levels after an intervention of psychological or behavioral scien-
tiﬁc literacy-related and/or sustainability competencies variables. These include, for
example, systems thinking(Bozkurt 2023), futures thinking(LahertoandRasa2022),
and reasoning and decision-making in sustainable development- and socio-scientiﬁc-
relatedissues(ŞekerandAydinli2023).Informationandcommunicationstechnology
integration and literacy (Liu 2024; Palomares-Ruiz et al. 2020), situational judgment
(Li et al. 2022), and social and ecological responsibility (Børsen et al. 2021) were
also included, as well as systems thinking, critical thinking, creative problem-solving
(Blatti et al. 2019), and creative self-efﬁcacy (Cheng et al. 2022) in STEM education.
Murphy and colleagues (2021) assessed self-efﬁcacy, critical engagement, sustain-
ability competencies, and transformative pedagogies among teachers, while among
preservice teachers, their beliefs about ESD (Ates and Sungur Gul 2018) and proac-
tivity and personal pedagogical knowledge in ESD (Gopalakrishnan et al. 2019),
among others.
5.3
Science Education, Sustainable Development,
and Environmental Education
Earlier studies in the literature associate the link between science education and
ESD with environmental education. For example, Gough (2017) traced the shift and
shaping of environmental sustainability, science education policies, and curricula
from ESD discourses, while Breiting and Wickenberg (2010) traced the progressive
development of environmental education and ESD in Sweden and Denmark. Some
studies assessed environmental-related competencies, such as Uitto and colleagues’
(2011) work with students’ interests, attitudes, and values about environmental issues
in the context of school science, Gilmanshina and colleagues’ (2018) proposed peda-
gogical frameworkfor buildingenvironmental literacythroughschool natural science
education, and List and colleagues’ (2020) investigation on cross-national differences
and correlates of environmental awareness among the 2015 Program for International
Student Assessment participants. Some studies relate to interventions, such as Ku and
colleagues’ (2020) work on analyzing basic characteristics of environmental science
education multimedia animation materials’ visualization and the development and
design methods. Moreover, Hernández-Barco and colleagues’ (2020) work on the
evaluation of the ﬁnal degree dissertation anchored on service learning principles
towards soft skills acquisition and SDG promotion.
680
I. P. Canlas
5.4
The Case of STEM Education
Vuong and colleagues (2021) pointed out the critical role of STEM education in
promoting sustainable development. STEM education is associated with quality
educationandisconsideredapromisingeducationalframeworkforsustainabledevel-
opment (Jamali et al. 2023), a key element of quality education (Chong 2019). A
signiﬁcant number of studies point to STEM education as a platform for combining
science education and ESD. Chowdhury and colleagues (2020) explored the trans-
contextual science education model, built from an initial student-relevant, soci-
etal issue-related STEM contextualization focused on developing science concep-
tual understanding. For preservice teachers, Türk and colleagues (2018) explored
a STEM curriculum design anchored in an interdisciplinary approach and teacher
collaboration.
Henze and colleagues (2022) developed and assessed a pedagogical approach
that combines robotics, coding, artiﬁcial intelligence, STE(arts)M, and sustainable
development. Cheng and colleagues (2022) assessed the implementation and impact
of a project-based program on creative self-efﬁcacy. Kulshreshtha and colleagues
(2022) designed and implemented foldscope-adapted curricula (a culturally sensitive
pedagogy involving translingual instruction) in post-secondary education to teach
themes in biology. Additionally, Blatti and colleagues (2019) explored the impact of
the systems thinking approach on undergraduate interdisciplinary research projects.
Meanwhile, Abdurrahman and colleagues (2023) assessed the impact of integrating
engineering design into STEM maker space on systems thinking skills among year
11 students.
5.5
On Indigenous and Traditional Knowledges
An important discourse in science education related to ESD is tapping and inte-
grating indigenous and traditional knowledges. Early on, Glasson and colleagues
(2010) elucidated the impact of merging worldviews and hybridized knowledge
and languages on creating a third space for curriculum development dialogue,
thus connecting indigenous ways of living with Eurocentric science. Ramirez
and colleagues (2017) proposed a multicultural science education sustainability
model incorporating ancient knowledge and indigenous heritage. At the same time,
Seehawer and Breidlid (2021) introduced dialogue between epistemologies as an
approach to integrating indigenous knowledge systems with Western knowledge in
education.
A study by Barret (2017) reﬂected and drew insights from science education,
indigenous knowledge, and ESD and argued that connecting formal and informal
knowledge is essentially the work of secondary education. An earlier study by Onwu
and Kyle (2011) proposed reforming the agenda in science education by increasing
socio-cultural relevance oriented toward sustainable development.
Towards a Responsive Science Education for Sustainable Development
681
5.6
Using Socio-Scientiﬁc Issues in Science Teaching
and Learning
Over the years, a signiﬁcant number of science education scholars have proposed
using socio-scientiﬁc issues in teaching and learning science. Less than a decade
ago, Eilks (2015) proposed models for using socio-scientiﬁc issues to bring ESD
into science teaching and learning. A recent study by Jackson and colleagues (2023)
presented a conceptualization and enactment of a program for high school biology
classrooms centered around sustainability-related socio-scientiﬁc issues. Tsai (2018)
assessed the effect of online argumentation of socio-scientiﬁc issues on senior
high school and undergraduate students’ scientiﬁc competencies and sustainability
attitudes.
Morin and colleagues (2017) proposed and validated an interactional reasoning
framework upon engaging students with socio-scientiﬁc discussions through socially
acute questions. Eggert and colleagues (2017) assessed the effect of computer-based
concept mapping scaffolds on conceptual understanding of climate change and socio-
scientiﬁc reasoning and decision-making, while Reis and colleagues (2020) assessed
the impact of student-curated exhibitions about socio-scientiﬁc issues on students’
perceptions of their scientiﬁc competence and science classes. Şeker and Aydinli
(2023) developed a module program on energy transformations and biodiversity,
narrating socio-scientiﬁc issues to foster positive decision-making on sustainable
development issues, and Kong and colleagues (2022) elucidated on the development
and prospects of socio-scientiﬁc issues teaching in the context of immersive media
technology.
5.7
Readiness for Science Education for Sustainable
Development
Indeed, there is a need to advance the nexus of science education and ESD. Nonethe-
less, the question lies extensively with teachers’ readiness and preparedness, consid-
eringthatESDremainsanemergingthemeinscienceeducation.Studiesoncapability
building and support for in-service and preservice teachers are imperative.
The literature presents some studies along this line. For example, Karaarslan
Semiz and Teksöz (2020) assessed the development of systems thinking skills of
preservice teachers through an outdoor ESD course. Ates and Sungur Gul (2018)
investigated preservice teachers’ beliefs on ESD and their sustainability behaviors.
Gopalakrishnan and colleagues (2019) explored the relationship between proac-
tivity and personal pedagogical knowledge in education for sustainable development
among preservice teachers. In addition, Martin and Carter (2015) explored preservice
teachers’ agency concerning education for sustainability.
With in-service teachers, João and colleagues (2023) presented the design and
assessment of an in-service teacher education program through an educational design
682
I. P. Canlas
research approach aimed at developing skills for experimental practical teaching of
sciencetopicswithinthescopeofeducationforsustainabledevelopment.Meanwhile,
Murphy and colleagues (2020) developed an innovative professional development
program for primary school teachers to teach sustainability through inquiry-based
science.
6
Conclusion
Aiming to contribute to the advancement of the agenda for sustainable develop-
ment research, this chapter presents a study that explored the intersection of science
education and ESD from 183 papers extracted from the Scopus database. The ﬁnd-
ings demonstrate the complementary role of scientiﬁc literacy and ESD and that the
nexus of science education and ESD remains fertile ground for research and develop-
ment. Such studies can reﬂect ESD in the context of science education or vice versa.
Although there is somehow a big picture and holistic understanding of sustainable
development and ESD, many pieces of its puzzle still need to be made clear and
known. Be that as it may, the literature provides evidence of the key role of science
education in sustainable development.
Science, from the Latin word ‘scientia,’ which means ‘to know,’ remains a strong
pillar and key to achieving the SDGs. The characterizations of scientiﬁc literacy,
including the visions and dimensions of scientiﬁc literacy and views on the nature of
science, strongly relate and adhere to most, if not all, facets of ESD. Exploring ways
of building, developing, and strengthening conceptual understandings of concepts
around SDG phenomena is necessary. While a holistic and higher-order under-
standing of SDGs is imperative, building solid foundational knowledge as a platform
is equally important. The rigor in building conceptual knowledge and replicability
of the science inquiry process continues to be relevant in exploring, knowing, and
learning different SDG phenomena.
The elements of the scientiﬁc inquiry process and the scientiﬁc method remain
relevant in understanding the complexity of the SDGs. More than ever, there is
a need to nurture curiosity and courage among learners to explore the unknown.
Views on the nature of science need to be strengthened to ensure appropriate and
responsive actions/behavior towards emerging socio-scientiﬁc issues and problems.
Related thereto, using socio-scientiﬁc issues in teaching and learning could foster
objectivity, data-driven planning, and decision-making, among others. It may be
necessary to explore further relevant teaching and learning approaches that include
some elements of inter- and transdisciplinary approaches to teaching and learning,
as well as problem-, project-, and research-based learning, among others.
Consideringthesimilaritiesandcomplementarityofscientiﬁcliteracyandsustain-
able development competencies, intuitively, sustainable development competencies
could be developed through science education in general. Therefore, developing and
implementing a sustainable development-informed science curriculum, including
relevant pedagogies, instructional materials, and authentic assessment, is imperative.
Towards a Responsive Science Education for Sustainable Development
683
Developing a holistic and more coherent science education for sustainable develop-
ment framework or model that merges the elements and principles of science educa-
tion and ESD may be necessary. The need for a contextual framework for STEM
education, integration of indigenous and traditional knowledges, and environmental
education under the umbrella of science education for sustainable development may
be necessary.
Finally, there is a need to hasten research on the intersection of science education
and ESD. Reﬂecting ESD in rationales and problem statements could induce sustain-
able development-responsive science education research that utilizes old, new, and
innovative research designs.
References
Abdurrahman A, Maulina H, Nurulsari N, Sukamto I, Umam AN, Mulyana KM (2023). Impacts
of integrating engineering design process into STEM makerspace on renewable energy unit
to foster students’ system thinking skills. Heliyon 9(4). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.
e15100
Addabbo T, Di Tommaso ML, Maccagnan A (2016) Education capability: a focus on gender and
science. Soc Indic Res 128(2):793–812. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11205-015-1057-8
Alam GM (2023) Has secondary science education become an elite product in emerging nations?—a
perspective of sustainable education in the era of MDGs and SDGs. Sustainability (Switzerland)
15(2). https://doi.org/10.3390/su15021596
Arnold JC(2020). The importance of different knowledge types in health-related decisions-the
example of type 2 diabetes. Sustainability (Switzerland) 12(8). https://doi.org/10.3390/SU1208
3396
Ates H, Sungur Gul K (2018) Investigating of pre-service science teachers’ beliefs on education for
sustainable development and sustainable behaviors. Int Electron J Environ Educ 8(2):105–122.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0749-5978(91)90020-T
Barrett AM (2017) Making secondary education relevant for all: reﬂections on science education
in an expanding sub-sector. Compare 47(6):962–978. https://doi.org/10.1080/03057925.2017.
1343127
Beniermann A, Glos M, Schumacher H, Fietze I, Völker S, Upmeier zu Belzen A (2023) ‘Sleep
Blindness’ in science education: how sleep health literacy can serve as a link between health
education and education for sustainable development. Sustainability (Switzerland) 15(16).
https://doi.org/10.3390/su151612217
Blatti JL, Garcia J, Cave D, Monge F, Cuccinello A, Portillo J, Juarez B, Chan E, Schwebel F (2019)
Systems thinking in science education and outreach toward a sustainable future. J Chem Educ
96(12):2852–2862. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.9b00318
Bögeholz S, Böhm M, Eggert S, Barkmann J (2014) Education for sustainable development in
german science education: past—present—future. Eurasia J Math Sci Technol Educ 10(4):231–
248. https://doi.org/10.12973/eurasia.2014.1079a
Borreguero GM, Jiménez JM, Correa FLN (2018) The concept of waste within the framework of
sustainable development through the analysis of the secondary education curriculum. Eurasia J
Math Sci Technol Educ 14(1):255–264. https://doi.org/10.12973/ejmste/79654
Børsen T, Serreau Y, Reifschneider K, Baier A, Pinkelman R, Smetanina T, Zandvoort H (2021)
Initiatives, experiences and best practices for teaching social and ecological responsibility in
ethics education for science and engineering students. Eur J Eng Educ 46(2):186–209. https://
doi.org/10.1080/03043797.2019.1701632
684
I. P. Canlas
Bozkurt E (2023) A bibliometric analysis of systems thinking research in science education 1991–
2022. Sci Educ Int 34(3):225–234. https://doi.org/10.33828/sei.v34.i3.6
Breiting S, Wickenberg P (2010) The progressive development of environmental education in
Sweden and Denmark. Environ Educ Res 16(1):9–37. https://doi.org/10.1080/135046209035
33221
Burns R (2001) Educating scientists in context: a Namibian case study. Int J Educ Dev 21(5):447–
461. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0738-0593(00)00075-4
Canino M, Zanelli A, Seri M, Degli Esposti A, Torreggiani A (2021) Young raw matters ambas-
sadors: high school students act as science communicators. Front Educ 6. https://doi.org/10.
3389/feduc.2021.690294
Canlas IP, Karpudewan M (2020). Consensus in science education BT—quality education. In: Leal
Filho W, Azul AM, Brandli L, Özuyar PG, Wall T (eds). Springer International Publishing, pp
1–11. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-69902-8_92-1
Cheng L, Wang M, Chen Y, Niu W, Hong M, Zhu Y (2022) Design my music instrument: a project-
based science, technology, engineering, arts, and mathematics program on the development of
creativity. Front Psychol 12. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.763948
Choi K, Lee H, Shin N, Kim S-W, Krajcik J (2011) Re-conceptualization of scientiﬁc literacy in
South Korea for the 21st century. J Res Sci Teach 48(6):670–697. https://doi.org/10.1002/tea.
20424
Chong CJ (2019) Preliminary review on preparations in Malaysia to improve STEM education. J
Sustain Sci Manag 14(5):135–147. https://ir.unimas.my/id/eprint/28223/
Chowdhury TBM, Holbrook J, Rannikmäe M (2020) Addressing sustainable development:
Promoting active informed citizenry through trans-contextual science education. Sustainability
(Switzerland) 12(8). https://doi.org/10.3390/SU12083259
Colucci-Gray L, Perazzone A, Dodman M, Camino E (2013) Science education for sustain-
ability, epistemological reﬂections and educational practices: from natural sciences to trans-
disciplinarity. Cult Sci Edu 8(1):127–183. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11422-012-9405-3
Cummings S, Dhewa C, Kemboi G, Young S (2023) Doing epistemic justice in sustainable devel-
opment: applying the philosophical concept of epistemic injustice to the real world. Sustain Dev
31(3):1965–1977. https://doi.org/10.1002/sd.2497
de Freitas M, da Silva Freitas MC (2013) Sustainability, Amazonia and environment: proposi-
tions and challenges. Int J Environ Stud 70(4):467–476. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207233.2013.
823030
DeBoer GE (2000) Scientiﬁc literacy: Another look at its historical and contemporary meanings
and its relationship to science education reform. J Res Sci Teach 37(6):582–601. https://doi.org/
10.1002/1098-2736(200008)37:6%3c582::AID-TEA5%3e3.0.CO;2-L
Dzvimbo MA, Mashizha TM, Zhanda K, Mawonde A (2022. Promoting sustainable development
goals: Role of higher education institutions in climate and disaster management in Zimbabwe.
Jamba: J Disaster Risk Stud 14(1). https://doi.org/10.4102/JAMBA.V14I1.1206
Eggert S, Nitsch A, Boone WJ, Nückles M, Bögeholz S (2017) Supporting students’ learning and
socioscientiﬁc reasoning about climate change—the effect of computer-based concept mapping
scaffolds. Res Sci Educ 47(1):137–159. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11165-015-9493-7
Eilks I (2015). Science education and education for sustainable development–Justiﬁcations, models,
practices and perspectives. Eurasia J Math Sci Technol Educ 11(1):149–158. https://doi.org/10.
12973/eurasia.2015.1313a
Funa AA, Gabay RAE, Ibardaloza RT, Limjap AA (2022) Knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors of
students and teachers towards education for sustainable development. Cakrawala Pendidikan
41(3):569–585. https://doi.org/10.21831/cp.v41i3.42407
Fyfe WS (1997) Earth system science for the 21st century: towards truly sustainable development.
Episodes 20(1):3–6. https://doi.org/10.18814/epiiugs/1997/v20i1/001
Gilmanshina SI, Gayfullina AZ, Fedotova NR, Gilmanshin IR (2018) Building the environmental
literacy through school natural science education. Astra Salvensis 6:245–253. https://www.
ceeol.com/search/article-detail?id=686796
Towards a Responsive Science Education for Sustainable Development
685
Glasson GE, Mhango N, Phiri A, Lanier M (2010) Sustainability science education in Africa:
negotiating indigenous ways of living with nature in the third space. Int J Sci Educ 32(1):125–
141. https://doi.org/10.1080/09500690902981269
Gopalakrishnan AC, Bhaskaran S, Ambujakshi S (2019) Relationship between proactivity and
personal pedagogical knowledge in esd among pre-service teachers: sub-sampling on social
media usage and subject discipline. J Teach Educ Sustain 21(2):73–90. https://doi.org/10.2478/
jtes-2019-0018
Gough A (2017) Searching for a crack to let environment light in: ecological biopolitics and educa-
tion for sustainable development discourses. Cult Stud Sci Educ 12(4):889–905. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11422-017-9839-8
Gutnikov OV, Dupan AS, Emelyantsev VP (2017) Problems of legal regulation improvement in
the sphere of science, technology and innovation in post-soviet space in keeping with modern
international regulatory trends. J Adv Res Law Econ 8(3):;829–837. https://doi.org/10.14505/
jarle.v8.3(25).16
Henze J, Schatz C, Malik S, Bresges A (2022) How might we raise interest in robotics, coding,
artiﬁcial intelligence, STEAM and sustainable development in university and on-the-job teacher
training? Front Educ 7. https://doi.org/10.3389/feduc.2022.872637
Hernández-Barco M, Sánchez-Martín J, Blanco-Salas J, Ruiz-Téllez T (2020) Teaching Down to
earth-service-learning methodology for science education and sustainability at the university
level: a practical approach. Sustainability (Switzerland) 12(2). https://doi.org/10.3390/su1202
0542
Hogan D, O’Flaherty J (2022) Exploring the nature and culture of science as an academic discipline:
implications for the integration of education for sustainable development. Int J Sustain High
Educ 23(8):120–147. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-06-2021-0236
Holbrook J, Rannikmae M (2007) The nature of science education for enhancing scientiﬁc literacy.
Int J Sci Educ 29(11):1347–1362. https://doi.org/10.1080/09500690601007549
Jackson WM, Binding MK, Grindstaff K, Hariani M, Koo BW (2023) Addressing sustainability in
the high school biology classroom through socioscientiﬁc issues. Sustainability (Switzerland)
15(7). https://doi.org/10.3390/su15075766
Jamali SM, Ale Ebrahim N, Jamali F (2023) The role of STEM Education in improving the quality
of education: a bibliometric study. Int J Technol Des Educ 33(3):819–840. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10798-022-09762-1
João P, Henriques MH, Rodrigues AV, Sá P (2023) In-service teacher education program through
an educational design research approach in the framework of the 2030 Agenda. Educ Sci 13(6).
https://doi.org/10.3390/educsci13060584
Karaarslan Semiz G, Teksöz G (2020) Developing the systems thinking skills of pre-service science
teachers through an outdoor ESD course. J Adventure Educ Outdoor Learn 20(4):337–356.
https://doi.org/10.1080/14729679.2019.1686038
Kong Z, Zhang S, Zhu F, Zhang J (2022) The development and prospects of socioscientiﬁc issues
teaching in the context of immersive media technology. Front Psychol 13. https://doi.org/10.
3389/fpsyg.2022.877311
Korte T, Otte L, Amel H, Beeken M (2023) “Burger.i.doo”—an innovative education game
for the assessment of sustainability from meat and substitute products in science education.
Sustainability (Switzerland) 15(1). https://doi.org/10.3390/su15010213
Ku M-T, Chiou S-C, Chan H-T (2020) Study of multimedia animation materials’ design in envi-
ronmental science education. J Environ Prot Ecol 21(2):663–671. https://scibulcom.net/en/art
icle/XKYv285SlLv2xBAD6UO8
Kubisch S, Parth S, Deisenrieder V, Oberauer K, Stötter J, Keller L (2021) From transdisciplinary
research to transdisciplinary education-the role of schools in contributing to community well-
being and sustainable development. Sustainability (switzerland) 13(1):1–13. https://doi.org/10.
3390/su13010306
Kubisch S, Krimm H., Liebhaber N, Oberauer K, Deisenrieder V, Parth S, Frick M, Stötter J, Keller
L (2022). Rethinking quality science education for climate action: transdisciplinary education
686
I. P. Canlas
for transformative learning and engagement. Front Educ 7. https://doi.org/10.3389/feduc.2022.
838135
Kulshreshtha P, Gupta S, Shaikh R, Aggarwal D, Sharma D, Rahi P (2022) Foldscope embedded
pedagogy in STEM education: a case study of SDG4 promotion in India. Sustainability
(Switzerland) 14(20). https://doi.org/10.3390/su142013427
Kumar P, Sahani J, Rawat N, Debele S, Tiwari A, Mendes Emygdio AP, Abhijith KV, Kukadia V,
Holmes K, Pfautsch S (2023) Using empirical science education in schools to improve climate
change literacy. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 178:113232. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2023.
113232
Kyle WC Jr (2006) The road from rio to Johannesburg: Where are the footpaths to/from science
education? Int J Sci Math Educ 4(1):1–18. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10763-005-0856-9
Laherto A, Rasa T (2022) Facilitating transformative science education through futures thinking.
Horizon 30(2):96–103. https://doi.org/10.1108/OTH-09-2021-0114
Lederman NG (1992) Students’ and teachers’ conceptions of the nature of science: a review of the
research. J Res Sci Teach 29(4):331–359. https://doi.org/10.1002/tea.3660290404
Lees J, Webb G (2018) A review of the literature to inform the development of a new model of
global placement: the global learning partnership. Phys Therapy Rev 23(1):40–49. https://doi.
org/10.1080/10833196.2017.1341144
Levrini O, Tasquier G, Barelli E, Laherto A, Palmgren E, Branchetti L, Wilson C (2021) Recognition
and operationalization of future-scaffolding skills: results from an empirical study of a teaching–
learning module on climate change and futures thinking. Sci Educ 105(2):281–308. https://doi.
org/10.1002/sce.21612
Li B, Ding B, Eilks I (2024) A case on a lesson plan about take-out plastics use addressing confu-
cianism for sustainability-oriented secondary chemistry education in mainland China. J Chem
Educ 101(1):58–68. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jchemed.3c00643
Li L, Lv X, Xi Y, Guo L (2022) Can preschool teachers’ accurate analysis of the development trajec-
tories of children’s preconceptions ensure their effective response? evidence from situational
judgement tests. Sustainability (Switzerland) 14(18). https://doi.org/10.3390/su141811725
List MK, Schmidt FTC, Mundt D, Föste-Eggers D (2020) Still green at ﬁfteen? Investigating
environmental awareness of the PISA 2015 population: cross-national differences and correlates.
Sustainability (Switzerland) 12(7). https://doi.org/10.3390/su12072985
Liu DS (2024) Infrastructure and gender disparity in information communication technology
literacy: a cross-country comparative study. Stat Politics Policy. https://doi.org/10.1515/spp-
2023-0017
Mansour N (2009) Science-technology-society (STS) a new paradigm in science education. Technol
Soc 29:287–297. https://doi.org/10.1177/0270467609336307
Martin J, Carter L (2015) Preservice teacher agency concerning education for sustainability (EfS):
a discursive psychological approach. J Res Sci Teach 52(4):560–573. https://doi.org/10.1002/
tea.21217
Martins IP (2013) Science education in general secondary school in East-Timor: From research to
cooperation. J Sci Educ 14(SPEC. ISSUE):20–23. https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?
eid=2-s2.0-84882993449&partnerID=40&md5=643f5d98d501fe6a3c5669173ecac39f
Maryanti R, Rahayu NI, Muktiarni M, Al Husaeni DF, Hufad A, Sunardi S, Nandiyanto ABD
(2022) Sustainable development goals in science education: deﬁnition, literature review, and
bibliometric analysis. J Eng Sci Technol 17:161–181. https://jestec.taylors.edu.my/SpecialIs
sueICMScE2022/ICMScE2022_20.pdf
Mogias A, Boubonari T, Realdon G, Previati M, Mokos M, Koulouri P, Cheimonopoulou MT (2019)
Evaluating ocean literacy of elementary school students: preliminary results of a cross-cultural
study in the Mediterranean Region. Front Marine Sci 6. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2019.
00396
Mokos M, Realdon G, Čižmek IZ (2020) How to increase ocean literacy for future ocean sustain-
ability? the inﬂuence of non-formal marine science education. Sustainability (switzerland)
12(24):1–12. https://doi.org/10.3390/su122410647
Towards a Responsive Science Education for Sustainable Development
687
Molina J, Hai NV, Cheng P-H, Chang C-Y (2021) Sdg’s quality education approach: Comparative
analysis of natural sciences curriculum guidelines between taiwan and colombia. Sustainability
(Switzerland), 13(6). https://doi.org/10.3390/su13063352
Morin O, Simonneaux L, Tytler R (2017) Engaging with socially acute questions: development and
validation of an interactional reasoning framework. J Res Sci Teach 54(7):825–851. https://doi.
org/10.1002/tea.21386
Murphy C, Smith G, Mallon B, Redman E (2020) Teaching about sustainability through inquiry-
based science in Irish primary classrooms: the impact of a professional development programme
on teacher self-efﬁcacy, competence and pedagogy. Environ Educ Res 26(8):1112–1136. https://
doi.org/10.1080/13504622.2020.1776843
Murphy C, Mallon B, Smith G, Kelly O, Pitsia V, Martinez Sainz G (2021) The inﬂuence of a
teachers’ professional development programme on primary school pupils’ understanding of and
attitudes towards sustainability. Environ Educ Res 27(7):1011–1036. https://doi.org/10.1080/
13504622.2021.1889470
Onwu GOM, Kyle WC (2011) Increasing the socio-cultural relevance of science education for
sustainable development. African J Res Math Sci Technol Educ 15(3):5–26. https://doi.org/10.
1080/10288457.2011.10740715
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, M (2016) Science literacy: concepts, contexts, and
consequences. The National Academies Press. https://doi.org/10.17226/23595
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Developement (2003) The PISA 2003 Assessment
Framework: Mathematics, Reading, Science and Problem Solving, Knowledge and Skills.
OECD
Palomares-Ruiz A, Cebrián A, López-Parra E, García-Toledano E (2020) ICT integration into
science education and its relationship to the digital gender gap. Sustainability (Switzerland)
12(13). https://doi.org/10.3390/su12135286
Parry S, Metzger E (2023) Barriers to learning for sustainability: a teacher perspective. Sustain
Earth Rev 6(1):2. https://doi.org/10.1186/s42055-022-00050-3
Ramirez JM, Gupta VK, Mesa OJ, Poveda G, Saldarriaga J, Gupta IB, Arias P (2017) A multi-
cultural science education model for sustainability at the National University of Colombia,
Medellin. Syst Res Behav Sci 34(5):577–584. https://doi.org/10.1002/sres.2486
Rauch F (2013) Regional networks in education: a case study of an Austrian project. Camb J Educ
43(3):313–324. https://doi.org/10.1080/0305764X.2013.818102
Reen FJ, Jump O, McSharry BP, Morgan J, Murphy D, O’Leary N, O’Mahony B, Scallan M,
Supple B (2021) The use of virtual reality in the teaching of challenging concepts in virology,
cell culture and molecular biology. Front Virtual Reality 2. https://doi.org/10.3389/frvir.2021.
670909
Reis P, Tinoca L, Baptista M, Linhares E (2020) The impact of student-curated exhibitions about
socio-scientiﬁc issues on students’ perceptions regarding their competences and the science
classes. Sustainability (switzerland) 12(7):1–13. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12072796
Roberts DA (2007) Scientiﬁc literacy/science literacy. In: Abell SK, Lederman NG (eds) Handbook
of research in science education. Routledge, pp 729–779
Rodríguez-Loinaz G, Ametzaga-Arregi I, Palacios-Agundez I (2022) ICT tools and citizen science:
a pathway to promote science learning and education for sustainable development in schools. J
Biol Educ. https://doi.org/10.1080/00219266.2022.2092192
Sanders CE, Byrd AR, Gibson KE, Golson A, Lamm KW, Lamm AJ (2023) Teaching systems
thinking concepts with hypothetical case scenarios: an exploration in food-systems science
education. Foods 12(14). https://doi.org/10.3390/foods12142663
Sauermann H, Vohland K, Antoniou V, Balázs B, Göbel C, Karatzas K, Mooney P, Perelló J, Ponti
M, Samson R, Winter S (2020) Citizen science and sustainability transitions. Res Policy 49(5).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2020.103978
Scowcroft G, Bishop T, Hotaling L, Keener P, McDonnell J, Peach C, Tuddenham P (2021) An
ocean science education network for the decade. Mar Technol Soc J 55(3):102–103. https://doi.
org/10.4031/MTSJ.55.3.40
688
I. P. Canlas
Seehawer M, Breidlid A (2021) Dialogue between epistemologies as quality education. Integrating
knowledges in Sub-Saharan African classrooms to foster sustainability learning and contextually
relevant education. Soc Sci Humanit Open 4(1). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssaho.2021.100200
Şeker F, Aydinli B (2023) A trial patch to sustainable development: perspectives from extracurricular
activities of elementary schools in Turkey. Sci Educ 32(2):421–446. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11
191-021-00315-x
Sjöström J, Eilks I (2018) Reconsidering different visions of scientiﬁc literacy and science educa-
tion based on the concept of bildung. In Dori YJ, Mevarech ZR, Baker DR (eds) Cognition,
metacognition, and culture in STEM education: learning, teaching and assessment. Springer
Nature, pp 65–88. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-66659-4
Sjöström J, Talanquer V (2014) Humanizing chemistry education: From simple contextualization
to multifaceted problematization. J Chem Educ 91(8):1125–1131. https://doi.org/10.1021/ed5
000718
Sleurs W (ed) (2008) Competencies for ESD (Education for Sustainable Development) teachers:
A framework to integrate ESD in the curriculum of teacher training institutes. www.csct-projec
t.org. https://unece.org/ﬁleadmin/DAM/env/esd/inf.meeting.docs/EGonInd/8mtg/CSCTHandb
ook_Extract.pdf
Sonetti G, Barioglio C, Campobenedetto D (2020) Education for sustainability in practice: a review
of current strategies within Italian universities. Sustainability 12(13). https://doi.org/10.3390/
su12135246
Stacchiotti L, Acqua A, Pennesi D, Beccaceci A, Paris E (2019) WASTEBERG: a didactic activity
about waste and sustainable use of georesources in relation to the Agenda 2030. Rendiconti
Online Societa Geologica Italiana 49:127–133. https://doi.org/10.3301/ROL.2019.62
Svyrydenko D, Revin F (2023) Embracing the philosophy of responsible citizenship–on a path to
Ukraine’s societal transformation. Studia Warminskie 60:119–134. https://doi.org/10.31648/sw.
9567
Tarng W, Ou K-L, Yu C-S, Liou F-L, Liou H-H (2015) Development of a virtual butterﬂy ecological
system based on augmented reality and mobile learning technologies. Virtual Reality 19(3–
4):253–266. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10055-015-0265-5
Trott CD, Weinberg AE (2020).Science education for sustainability: strengthening children’s
science engagement through climate change learning and action. Sustainability 12(16). https://
doi.org/10.3390/su12166400
Tsai C-Y (2018) The effect of online argumentation of socio-scientiﬁc issues on students’ scientiﬁc
competencies and sustainability attitudes. Comput Educ 116:14–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
compedu.2017.08.009
Tsaparlis G, Hartzavalos S, Nakiboğlu C (2013) Students’ knowledge of nuclear science and its
connection with civic scientiﬁc literacy in two European contexts: the case of newspaper articles.
Sci Educ 22(8):1963–1991. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11191-013-9578-5
Türk N, Kalaycı N, Yamak H (2018) New trends in higher education in the globalizing world:
STEM in teacher education. Univ J Educ Res 6(6):1286–1304. https://doi.org/10.13189/ujer.
2018.060620
Uitto A, Juuti K, Lavonen J, Byman R, Meisalo V (2011) Secondary school students’ interests, atti-
tudes and values concerning school science related to environmental issues in Finland. Environ
Educ Res 17(2):167–186. https://doi.org/10.1080/13504622.2010.522703
UNESCO (1993) Project 2000+ International Forum on Scientiﬁc and Technological Literacy for
All, ED-93/Conf-016/LD-014. https://ﬁles.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED383555.pdf
UNESCO (2017) Education for sustainable development goals: learning objectives. UNESCO.
https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000247444
UNESCO (2020) Education for sustainable development: a roadmap. UNESCO. https://www.env.
go.jp/policy/entaku06_ref03_1.pdf
van Dam-Mieras MCE, Meester MAM, Sloep PB (1995) Sustainability, cleaner production and
an international learning resource. J Clean Prod 3(1–2):3–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/0959-652
6(95)00034-C
Towards a Responsive Science Education for Sustainable Development
689
Vuong Q-H, La V-P, Ho M-T, Pham T-H, Vuong T-T, Vuong H-M, Nguyen M-H (2021) A data
collection on secondary school students’ stem performance and reading practices in an emerging
country. Data Intell 3(2):336–356. https://doi.org/10.1162/dint_a_00091
Wamsler C (2020) Education for sustainability: Fostering a more conscious society and transfor-
mation towards sustainability. Int J Sustain High Educ 21(1):112–130. https://doi.org/10.1108/
IJSHE-04-2019-0152
Wilujeng I, Dwandaru WSB, Rauf RABA (2019) The effectiveness of education for environmental
sustainable development to enhance environmental literacy in science education: a case study
of hydropower. Jurnal Pendidikan IPA Indonesia 8(4):521–528. https://doi.org/10.15294/jpii.
v8i4.19948
Zoller U (2013) Science, technology, environment, society (STES) literacy for sustainability: what
should it take in chem/science education? Educ Quim 24(2):207–214. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0187-893X(13)72464-9
Zowada C, Frerichs N, Zuin VG, Eilks I (2020) Developing a lesson plan on conventional and green
pesticides in chemistry education-a project of participatory action research. Chem Educ Res
Practice 21(1):141–153. https://doi.org/10.1039/c9rp00128j
Distance Learning and Digitization
as a Means to Challenge Students’
Thinking Toward Sustainability
Research
Luis Velazquez, Nora Munguia, Alma Gabriela Pulgarin-Herrera,
Jesus Salvador Gutierrez-Ruelas, and Claudia Jayne Falcon-Perez
Abstract Researchisasubstantivefunctionofhighereducationinstitutions,through
which they encourage undergraduate and graduate students to master research
methods to solve fundamental societal problems. Given the nature of distance educa-
tion programs, the use of digital technologies is an invaluable competitive advan-
tage in training new scientists in the ﬁeld of sustainability research, mainly due
to their rapid adaptation to the digital demands of the students of generations Y
and Z. This chapter aims to explore the role of distance learning and digitalization
that has sparked young higher education students’ interest in research activities to
ensure the successful functioning of sustainability science in the coming years. The
content suggests that challenging students’ thinking toward sustainability research
goes beyond teaching proven research methodologies for completing a thesis. At
present, sparking the interest of young scientists in sustainability research requires
the reengineering of research processes in higher education, where digitization is
necessary to ensure the successful functioning of sustainability science in the coming
years.
Keywords Distance learning · Information and communication technology ·
Higher education · Sustainability research · Artiﬁcial intelligence
L. Velazquez (B) · N. Munguia · J. S. Gutierrez-Ruelas · C. J. Falcon-Perez
Industrial Engineering Department, Interdisciplinary Faculty of Engineering, University of
Sonora, Hermosillo, Mexico
e-mail: luis.velazquez@unison.mx
N. Munguia
e-mail: nora.munguia@unison.mx
J. S. Gutierrez-Ruelas
e-mail: salvador.gutierrez@unison.mx
C. J. Falcon-Perez
e-mail: a221230199@unison.mx
A. G. Pulgarin-Herrera
Faculty of Languages, University of the State of Durango, Juarez, Mexico
e-mail: gabypulgarin@ujed.mx
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_38
691
692
L. Velazquez et al.
1
Introduction
Research is a substantive function of higher education institutions, through which
they encourage undergraduate and graduate students to master research methods
to solve fundamental societal problems. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Develop-
ment supports higher education scientists conducting research during the last decade.
Under this framework, Sustainable Development Goal 4: Quality Education has been,
without a doubt, one of the top priorities for higher education institutions (HEIs)
because SDG 4 is an umbrella goal for higher education institutions (HEIs) that
allows research on all the other SDGs. Particularly, target 4.7 states:
By 2030, ensure that all learners acquire the knowledge and skills needed to promote sustain-
able development, including, among others, through education for sustainable development
and sustainable lifestyles, human rights, gender equality, promotion of a culture of peace
and non-violence, global citizenship and appreciation of cultural diversity and of culture’s
contribution to sustainable development (U.N. General Assembly 2015).
Based on this target, HEIs instruct prospective sustainability scientists in multidis-
ciplinary research approaches to carry out their theses to obtain a degree. Nowadays,
training scientiﬁc apprentices requires novel education structures characterized by
digital tools. There is a simple reason: higher education enrollment comprises Gener-
ation Y and Z students (Kuleto et al. 2021). These students are characterized by their
high digital proﬁciency level (Ranieri et al. 2021). Still, despite solid similarities,
particular differences in their learning styles need to be recognized because Genera-
tion Z will soon become the largest group of students (Andheska et al. 2020). Gener-
ation Y students are characterized by the incorporation of the use of mobile devices,
spatiotemporal mobility, interaction through social networks or multi-platforms, the
use of information and communication technologies (ICTs), ﬂexible schedules, and
a reduction in take-home tasks, as well as teamwork and the formation of multidis-
ciplinary networks to solve problems (Avila-Lopez and Zayas 2019). On the other
hand, Generation Z students are considered the ﬁrst true digital natives, different
from the previous generation (Millennials), so they process information and learn
differently; they are more autonomous and need ICTs in their learning processes as
an essential factor (Coppo 2020).
The COVID-19 pandemic accelerated the digitization of educational processes
at universities worldwide, revealing a vast digital divide between professors and
studentsregardingtheirbasicdigitalabilitiesandskills(Maliarchuk2022).Ofcourse,
students also underwent a process of adaptation to digital technologies where the
interaction with the platforms and teaching systems was their total responsibility
(Sanchez-Santillan et al. 2016). Their relation with online learning caused problems
of different kinds, mainly because students had to adapt to a new reality for which
many were not prepared economically, mentally, and emotionally (Ammade et al.
2022), or they did not have the technological support or knowledge necessary to face
it (Giatma et al. 2020). Some scholars reported that students presented disorienta-
tion, distraction, and cognitive overload because, for the ﬁrst time, they tried to use
programs that were confusing or difﬁcult to manage (Scheiter and Gerjets 2007).
Distance Learning and Digitization as a Means to Challenge Students’ …
693
The psychological aspect was also affected by the pressure generated by reading or
understanding materials and taking exams independently, often at a different pace
than the rest of the students in their class (Maqbulin 2021). An investigation of a
group of university students showed that they experienced mild to moderate stress
levels during the pandemic (Wahyu and Simanullang 2020).
It should be noted that those students with previous digital knowledge showed
more resilience against the severe COVID-19 disruption (Laher et al. 2021; Liu
et al. 2023). Likewise, this reality was also disturbing, complex, and challenging
for tenured science professors who faced severe stressors that caused them stress,
anxiety, and other psychological symptoms, negatively impacting their academic
performance (Munguia 2023). In response to the disruptions of COVID-19, the use
of technology to overcome learning difﬁculties in current educational systems has
become a challenge for academic institutions (Anholon et al. 2020). For higher educa-
tion institutions, speciﬁcally, strategies were identiﬁed to allow them to face unknown
uncertainties during the pandemic based on four main dimensions: resilience and
change management, digital transformation and online learning, curricular change,
and sustainability (Rasli et al. 2022). The inclusion of sustainability as part of these
also makes educational systems essential actors to advance towards fulﬁlling the
2030 Agenda, which increases the challenges of institutions with a multidisciplinary
character (Ranjbari et al. 2021). In some way, the pandemic served to alert professors
of the need to strengthen their digital skills. In the post-COVID world, training young
scientists demands that science professors be digitally competent by mastering ICTs,
digital platforms, and artiﬁcial intelligence (Mindigulova et al. 2023). In this context,
this chapter aims to explore the role of distance learning and digitalization that has
sparked young higher education students’ interest in research activities to ensure the
successful functioning of sustainability science in the coming years.
The following sections of this chapter offer insights into the fascinating adven-
ture of challenging young students’ thinking toward sustainability research through
distance learning and digitizing the research processes in higher education.
2
Theoretical Foundations of Distance Learning (DL)
Concerning Research
Educating scientists has been linked to digitization in many ways, from the funda-
mental execution of commands to the current artiﬁcial intelligence programs. Nowa-
days, it is expected that digital platforms, such as Zoom, Microsoft Teams, and
other ICTs, be used to support research meetings, international conferences, and
congresses. Which offer a wide range of services and beneﬁts that strengthen the
global scientiﬁc community through interaction and connectivity through comfort,
convenience, and ﬂexible schedules; however, long before, the research logistics
were different.
694
L. Velazquez et al.
Various terms have been used to deﬁne distance learning, such as virtual educa-
tion, e-education, online education, non-conventional modalities, and remote educa-
tion (García Aretio 2002). Regardless of the speciﬁc term, this education modality
raises the quality of teaching–learning because it respects its ﬂexibility or avail-
ability; that is, the times and spaces that result from the new communication tech-
nologies and digital information and the creation of network access systems (Lara
2022). Furthermore, distance education also focuses on education programs, whose
methodology uses teaching–learning strategies to overcome the limitations of space
and time between the actors within the educational process (Arias et al. 2010).
According to Peters (2002), it ﬂourished from about the mid-nineteenth century
when printed media, the postal service, and the telephone served to develop the educa-
tional process. Still, the greatest boom in DL was in the second half of the twentieth
century (Begoña Tellería 2004). By the 1980s, technologies such as compact discs
and videodiscs began to be incorporated into education. In the 90 s, the internet started
transmitting knowledge as part of teaching–learning. By the middle of the 2000s, the
use of Web 2.0 began the transition from a behaviorist approach to a constructivist
one, in which the student constructs knowledge more actively without depending so
much on the instruction of a professor (Passerini and Granger 2000). During that
period, new paradigms of DL were generated as technology evolved (García Aretio
and García Blanco 2016). Although there is no signiﬁcant disagreement about DL’s
importance for science, there is no consensus about how those paradigms evolved.
On the one hand, some authors argue that DL represents a deviation from traditional
education, which is implemented with trial and error and lacks theoretical founda-
tions (Keegan 1980; Holmberg 1995; Nichols 2003). On the other hand, however,
other scholars claim the existence of several DL theories with scientiﬁc methods
to systematize the laws, ideas, principles, and norms that describe, explain, verify,
and predict the educational phenomenon of the distance modality and regulate its
pedagogical development (Aretio 1989; Keegan 1980).
Wedemeyer (1971) introduced the theory of independence study. This theory
maintains that this DL should facilitate the independence and autonomy of students
so that they can achieve their learning goals and self-regulate their processes, which
implicatestheresponsibilityforbuildingtheirknowledgeattheirownpace.Similarly,
Moore (1977) incorporated the concept of transactional distance, where students play
an active role during the educational process.
From a different perspective, however, in a complementary way, principles based
on industrial models are transferred to educational processes to explain the charac-
teristics of distance education, which gives rise to the industrial model (Peters 1994).
Brenes Espinoza (2004) states that the industrial model theory is somewhat similar to
industrialization approaches such as the specialization of tasks, the division of labor,
its potential to reach students regardless of their geographical location, the existence
of evaluations of the process and the products to increase their effectiveness, its
objectivity and its proﬁtability irrespective of the number of students. Finally, the
theory of interaction and communication aims to establish communication channels
between professors and students to foster self-learning. This theory becomes a guided
didactic conversation model through the interaction with the teaching materials. As
Distance Learning and Digitization as a Means to Challenge Students’ …
695
there is a personal relationship between teachers and their students, students feel
motivated to achieve the learning goals through the didactic materials, the interaction
via conversations and messages, and feedback (Keegan 1986). Students’ competen-
cies, well-structured didactic materials, and good interaction between professors and
students are critical factors in the success of this model (Keegan 1986; Barberà et al.
2001).
After having explored the previous theories, it is possible to conceptualize the
evolution of DL into four stages, proposed by Simpson and Anderson (2012):
correspondence, telecommunications, telematics, and the internet, which is the
current stage in which technology has become a necessity for most social, scien-
tiﬁc, economic, and political spheres. Furthermore, it originated a radical change or
advance since media began to promote communication and synchronous activities.
Some scholars have proposed a ﬁfth “virtual” stage based on interaction and interac-
tivitybetweenstudents,media,activities,andevaluation(LealAfanador2013).These
technological innovation processes have enabled educational institutions to improve
pedagogical practices and allow the professional and institutional development of
the entire scholarly community (Cebrián Serna 2003).
Like any other scientiﬁc discipline, sustainability science has incorporated
technological innovations to make its tasks more efﬁcient, determining modern
sustainability research trends.
3
Sustainability Research Trends in the Context of the 2030
Agenda 2030
New technologies produced changes in science teaching methods that promote new
skills in students with more dynamic and collaborative characteristics to challenge
students’ thinking toward sustainability research. Today, the information society
demands a transformation in science education that allows trained professionals to
insert themselves into the unique demands of the current social paradigm and, as
Aretio (2019) mentioned, to form a population capable of facing new situations.
Over time, this scenario, with high digital literacy and greater social awareness,
provided an ideal breeding ground for scientists interested in research based on the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Inrecentyears,animpressivegrowthofSDGs-relatedliteratureinElsevierScopus
has been observed (Alﬁrević et al. 2023), emphasizing this research topic’s scientiﬁc
relevance. The existence of monitoring and performance systems to rank worldwide
higher education institutions in contributing to meeting SDGs is also remarkable
since research is one of their critical criteria (Times Higher Education 2023; UI
GreenMetric 2023). These outcomes reﬂect what happens daily in university research
centers where undergraduate and postgraduate professors, students, and tutors jointly
696
L. Velazquez et al.
conduct research projects focusing on the SDGs of the 2030 Agenda for Sustain-
able Development. The latter is desirable because SDGs are interwoven to address
challenges posed by wicked problems.
According to Rittel and Webber (1973), wicked problems have ten characteristics:
1. There is no deﬁnitive formulation of a wicked problem.
2. Wicked problems have no stopping rule.
3. Solutions to wicked problems are not true or false but good or bad.
4. There is no immediate and no ultimate test of a solution to a wicked problem.
5. Every solution to a wicked problem is a “one-shot operation” because there is
no opportunity to learn by try-and-error; every attempt counts signiﬁcantly.
6. Wicked problems do not have an enumerable set of potential solutions, nor is
there a well-described set of permissible operations that may be incorporated
into the plan.
7. Every wicked problem is essentially unique.
8. Every wicked problem can be considered to be a symptom of another problem.
9. The existence of a discrepancy representing a wicked problem can be explained in
numerous ways. The choice of explanation determines the nature of the problem’s
resolution.
Although the concept of a wicked problem was ﬁrst characterized in the plan-
ning/governing system theory domain, sustainability scholars have embraced the
term because many of these characteristics apply to sustainability problems, mainly
in their social dimension. It is a fact that adapting to respond to the signiﬁcant chal-
lenges that these types of complex situations represent requires excellent intellectual
effort and investment of resources to address the lack of consensus on norms and
values (Leal Filho 2022; Block et al. 2022). Sustainability in itself is considered a
¨wicked problem¨ based on its complex relationships between the economic, envi-
ronmental, and social dimensions and the presence of multiple heterogeneous stake-
holders (Brønn and Brønn 2018). According to Pryshlakivsky and Searcy (2013),
the high levels of complexity in the situations associated with sustainability seem to
fall into this category. Even in operational terms, sustainability implies ambiguity,
complexity, and uncertainty transferred to the different logistical stages; the Sustain-
able Development Supply Chain is considered a perverse problem (Pederneiras et al.
2022). The social and institutional implications and scientiﬁc complexity have led
to a lack of clarity in alternative solutions for sustainable supplies, which is why this
category is also called a “wicked problem” (Ranabahu 2020).
External to sustainability, other issues associated with its framework of action are
also considered a “wicked problem.” Climate change falls into this classiﬁcation,
given its severe implications for the lives of human beings (Lehtonen et al. 2018).
Perry (2015) even deﬁnes adaptation to climate change in this classiﬁcation, given
the absence of clear solutions and the disagreement of the parties on values, norms,
and ﬁrst steps, which makes adaptation difﬁcult. Poverty is considered an excellent
example of a wicked problem because it is hard to ﬁnd agreement on its deﬁnition,
causes, and solutions in the academic framework (Pradilla et al. 2022). Food safety
is also identiﬁed as a perverse problem due to the different interpretations of its
Distance Learning and Digitization as a Means to Challenge Students’ …
697
deﬁnition that cause divergent solutions without a consensus that allows adequate
solution policies (Grochowska et al. 2014).
The COVID-19 pandemic severely disrupted every substantive function in higher
education institutions. In many ways, university life changed for everybody. For
obvious reasons, the suspension of classes was the most signiﬁcant concern for the
university authorities, who focused all their resources and efforts on restoring the
return to the classrooms by all possible means (Treve 2021). While all this chaos was
happening in instruction, researchers also struggled to keep their research centers and
students’ activities functioning (Bozkurt et al. 2022). This unprecedented transforma-
tion experienced by universities led to a rethink of how higher education institutions
researched to ensure inclusive and equitable higher education for all. Novel research
strategies were fundamentally characterized by digital technologies, which guaran-
teed to regain momentum toward knowledge generation. However, it was more than
evident that adopting digital solutions under the label of distance education was
not, and still is not, an easy task since it implied modifying traditional structures
that go far beyond the acquisition of computers and software (Warren and Churchill
2022). In particular, software training and capacitation created additional challenges
in conﬁguring research methods. Researchers, professors, and students had to adapt
to virtual environments, which generated new sociocultural realities (Poddubnaya
et al. 2021).
Although using digital platforms and other communication technology tools
caused doubts among the scientiﬁc community during the ﬁrst months of the
pandemic, over the years, the knowledge acquired on ICTs has proven effective in the
transition to online research (Batdı et al. 2023). During the pandemic, scientiﬁc jour-
nals began to publish bibliometric studies showing the beneﬁts of distance learning
and ICTs (Sanjaya and Pandey 2021). These studies allowed us to learn about the
increase in investigation and its direction during this period. The adoption of distance
education due to the pandemic increased the number of publications referring to this
topic, with the most signiﬁcant number of publications associated with accessibility
to electronic learning being recorded in 2020 (Obidat 2022). The subﬁelds of artiﬁcial
intelligence, machine learning, and deep learning constitute new research directions
for e-learning that also emerged as a consequence of the pandemic (Brika et al.
2022). In a broader spectrum, bibliometric studies also addressed research associ-
ated with sustainability. Some works used a merged bibliometric data set to examine
the relationships between Coronavirus, sustainability, and development (Gatto et al.
2023). Another bibliometric study suggests that the growth of scientiﬁc literature
related to sustainability is concentrated in the disciplines associated with applied
social sciences, environmental sciences, energy, management, engineering, human-
ities, and psychology (Côrtes and Rodrigues 2016). Other studies have emerged on
the issues of value chains within the framework of sustainable trade (Agrawal et al.
2022). By early 2022, bibliometric methods had become dominant in SDG studies
(Mishra et al. 2023). The bibliometric studies have identiﬁed that the economy and
social effects are the ﬁrst research topic associated with the SDGs, with exploratory
studies and case studies being the most used types of research, with the majority
698
L. Velazquez et al.
of studies focusing on industrialized and developing countries (Indana and Pahlevi
2023).
In addition to the evidence supported by bibliometric studies, future trends in
sustainability research will likely be inﬂuenced by the development of ICTs, so it
is not surprising that distance education should lead this development. The digital
reengineering of higher education institutions towards sustainability science should
not be further delayed.
4
Sustainability Research Ethics
Young scientists must learn from day one that unethical practices are intolerable and
there is no place for them in science. Conducting credible scientiﬁc research is related
toscientiﬁcmethodologyandethicswhenapplyingsuchmethods.Scienceprofessors
must emphasize scientiﬁc ethics before teaching research methodologies, whether
experimental or non-experimental, qualitative or quantitative. There is nothing more
essential to research than credibility. It goes further than measuring and avoiding
implicit bias in research, which may negatively affect the conﬁdence of stakeholders
in a particular scientiﬁc work (Spaulding 2022).
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) integration in scientiﬁc research has undergone a
gradual process and has evolved over the last decades. Institutions dedicated to gener-
ating knowledge emphasize disciplines where data science converges to manage the
knowledge generated effectively. Artiﬁcial intelligence has beneﬁted this task, espe-
cially metadata management (Trejo Medina 2022). For the speciﬁc case of content
generation through Chat Generative Pre-Trained Transformer, or ChatGPT, applied
to scientiﬁc research, they have the potential to facilitate interaction with pre-existing
data, information, and relevant resources through the so-called generative artiﬁcial
intelligence, which is capable of generating new content such as texts, images, music
or even programming codes (Wang et al. 2023). Scholars have also highlighted the
potential usefulness of AI in facilitating the search for information, the processing,
and even the interpretation of the content that a researcher could use for their publi-
cations (Krenn et al. 2022; Magallanes et al. 2023; Medina Romero 2023). AI Tech-
nology has permeated all facets of education, both for the tasks carried out by students
and for its use, which will become more common in the coming years. As a result,
science students and young researchers can generate research content with the quality
of a tenured researcher, which is desirable and plausible.
On the other hand, the proliferation of AI tools in academic research has raised
considerable concerns among scholars because much remains to be done regarding
academic integrity (Díaz 2023). Although everything mentioned above seems ﬁne, in
reality, this has generated controversy, especially from an ethical point of view, since
the use of chatbots can generate scientiﬁc content that anyone could attribute the
responsibility to authorship in works generated by AI, in addition to the patentability
of inventions created by algorithms, and legal liability if an AI generates content
Distance Learning and Digitization as a Means to Challenge Students’ …
699
that infringes pre-existing intellectual property rights (Salvagno et al. 2023). There-
fore, it is essential to establish mechanisms to identify and sanction the unethical
use of chatbots in scientiﬁc writing; human supervision is necessary in the scientiﬁc
process to guarantee the quality and integrity of the results (Bianchini et al. 2022).
Another essential aspect to consider regarding ownership of data or content gener-
ated from AI is the speed with which this content is developed since it is constantly
evolving, so there is no applicable global consensus in legal terms in an area where
changes are constant (Qadir 2023). Artiﬁcial intelligence in science is undoubtedly
essential in raising signiﬁcant considerations about human–machine collaboration,
knowledge management, and scientiﬁc communication. Although it is still in doubt
whether artiﬁcial intelligence can replace human intelligence in the nature of scien-
tiﬁc research (Barrios 2023) it also entails risks and ethical challenges that must
be addressed through regulations (Suazo 2023), responsibility, transparency, and
legality regarding scientiﬁc dissemination (Lopezosa 2023).
5
Illustrative Case Study
This illustrative case study presents the strategy from the coordination of a
Distance Learning Sustainability Bachelor’s degree to engage students in scien-
tiﬁc research through developing an undergraduate bachelor thesis. This bachelor’s
degree has a pedagogical perspective for the challenge of promoting teaching–
learning processes that develop competencies for sustainability to provide solutions
to socio-environmental problems, seeking to generate awareness for sustainability in
the context of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It belongs to a large
public university in northwestern Mexico with a long tradition as a sustainable educa-
tion promoter. In 2008, the university implemented and Certiﬁed an Environmental
Management System (EMS) with the ISO 14000 international standard. The EMS
was linked to their academic sustainability programs to promote cooperation with
industry and other economic sectors (Velazquez et al. 2000). The institution occupies
an exemplary position among the world’s top sustainable universities within the UI
Green Metric World University 2021 Ranking, 172 (UI GreenMetric 2023).
Notwithstanding the above, attracting Generation Y and Z students to science is
an issue of growing concern in the bachelor’s degree program because of the small
number of talented and motivated students who desire to write an undergraduate
thesis. According to data from the Direccion de Planeacion y Evaluacion (2023),
which compiles statistics, the Interdisciplinary Engineering Faculty students who
achieved their university degree by writing a thesis in 2023 were less than 3% out
of 5,627. Table 1 shows the records are lower in the academic department where the
Sustainability bachelor’s degree is assigned.
To determine the potential causes of these unsatisfactory rates in the elabora-
tion of the thesis, the school carried out a focus group made up of four experts
who participated in the design and adaptation of the program and who were also
now part of the teaching staff and coordinators of the bachelor’s degree. Experts
700
L. Velazquez et al.
Table 1 Percentage of students graduating through thesis preparation
Academic
year
Interdisciplinary engineering faculty
Academic Department
Students
enrolled
Graduate
students
University
degree by
writing a
thesis (%)
Students
enrolled
Graduate
students
University
degree by
writing a
thesis (%)
2023
5,627
308
2.8
2,852
59
1.69
2022
5,429
880
3.3
2,640
215
0.47
2021
5,329
825
2.2
2,529
149
0.67
2020
5,368
719
6.2
2482
149
0.00
Source Own elaboration from Direccion de Planeacion y Evaluacion (2023)
suggested two reasons for such a situation: ﬁrstly, to graduate with a bachelor’s
degree, the institution offers students eight options, one of which is to write a thesis.
In general, elaborating a thesis document can take up to two extra years after the
student has completed their academic courses. This fact discourages most students
because other degree options are more expeditious. Secondly, though writing a thesis
is rewarding in terms of satisfaction, few students graduate through this option, given
the complex, stressful, time-consuming, and frustrating process. Higher education
literature has diversely explored these factors preventing thesis writing (Man and
Zhan 2023; Gezahegn and Gedamu 2023; Quinto 2022; Sadouki 2023). As a result
of the focus group, experts endorsed the proposal to develop a strategy that integrates
all phases of writing a thesis, such as reading literature, designing the methodolog-
ical approach, collecting data, analyzing results, and elaborating conclusions. The
strategy is based on the principles outlined in a UNESCO document, describing a
framework for implementing education initiatives during the decade of action to
meet SDGs by 2030 (UNESCO 2020). Experts also highlighted the importance
of fostering ICTs to promote digital literacy and strengthen curricula and research
methodologies. Finally, the experts recommended progressive advances in preparing
the thesis document from the beginning of the academic program instead of waiting
until the last semesters, when theses usually begin to be written at this institution.
Thus, to boost sustainability research, the curriculum map integrates the academic
load and thesis preparation over six semesters so that students can graduate through
the thesis option and get the diploma simultaneously at the end of their studies. The
thesis topics must be directly related to a particular goal of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
In this context, the thesis document starts to be written when the student enters
the ﬁrst semester of the degree and continues on a semester-by-semester basis. In
the ﬁrst semester, the students aim to analyze the main sustainability problems at the
international, national, state, and local scales. Moreover, it begins with an in-depth
analysis of what is established in the 2030 Agenda to determine the areas covered in
each SDG. Subsequently, work is carried out on the search for different problems and
their delimitation to visualize their solution with the available scientiﬁc resources
Distance Learning and Digitization as a Means to Challenge Students’ …
701
and the feasibility of addressing them from a project for sustainability. When the
topic to be worked on has been deﬁned, the formulation of the research questions
and objectives begins to be developed, which, with the help of the facilitator, are
established according to the institution’s guidelines.
During the second semester, the students are aimed to develop a theoretical frame-
work. They are taught techniques to review literature for the adoption of referen-
tial theories and methodologies to justify their sustainability projects and back up
their hypotheses or research questions. In addition, plagiarism and the guidelines
for writing, citations, and references of the theoretical foundation are discussed. The
use of AI chatbots like ChatGPT as a tool for cheating is penalized, and rules have
been made to discourage this practice. When the theoretical framework is ﬁnalized,
mentors must validate the draft’s authenticity using plagiarism checker software.
Students develop the methodological design of their sustainability project in the
third semester. The general purpose of the module is to identify and select the method-
ological techniques according to the formulated problem, that is, for the student to
analyze the different types of methodological designs that are used in sustainability
science to propose a method of research that meets the stated objectives to provide an
answer to support or refute their hypothesis. At this point, students have developed a
thesis document containing their goals, research questions, hypotheses, and clearly
deﬁned methodology and methods, including the instruments for data collection and
a Gantt chart.
Students determine the ideal way to collect quantitative, qualitative, or a mixture
of both data during the fourth semester. They often conduct surveys, interviews,
report reviews, focus groups, and testing to gather data in an unbiased manner. Two
seminars are scheduled during the semester to report partial results. In the ﬁfth
semester, students learn techniques for measuring, synthesizing, and analyzing data.
Then, they write their ﬁnal thesis draft supporting or refuting their hypothesis or
answering their research questions. The last semester is devoted to preparing students
to effectively defend their thesis, which includes public speaking and PowerPoint
skills.
At present, sparking the interest of young scientists in sustainability research
requires the reengineering of educational processes in higher education, where digi-
tization is necessary to ensure the successful functioning of sustainability science in
the coming years. Figure 1 depicts the sustainability mindset endorsed by faculty,
which is currently stimulated by ICTs. For instance, the Moodle platform has allowed
the incorporation of SDGs-related bibliographies into all courses. It also includes an
alert system for students to know their activities’ schedules and progress processes.
It has been widely accepted and very user-friendly, saving time when sending activ-
ities by email. On this platform, students also ﬁnd all the information necessary to
consult the requirements for the preparation of the thesis in each of the stages, which
was enriched with the use of other auxiliary digital platforms, such as YouTube,
suggesting tutorial videos., which are more friendly and accessible for students to
understand in terms of the guidelines to follow, especially in the ﬁrst stages of
preparing the thesis, which are the ones where the most signiﬁcant complexity is
perceived. It also allows the completion of multiple-choice exams and the obtaining
702
L. Velazquez et al.
Fig. 1 Digitization of educational and research processes to meet SDGs at universities
of results instantly, where students can also receive feedback on the correct answers
to their incorrect answers. Likewise, the use of a reference manager such as Mendeley
has contributed to the administration of references in shorter times, making it easier
for students to ﬁle information with the required formats, saving them search time
and tedious manual reference processes, allowing them to download information
from the network in the correct format directly. Using Zoom and Teams platforms
has led to greater rapprochement between students and tutors, who have established
better communication through spaces more tailored to their needs.
This illustrative case study notes that ICTs have been essential in challenging
students’ thinking toward sustainability research. So far, results have been promising,
but the number of students graduating through the elaboration of a thesis is less when
compared to other graduation options.
6
Conclusions
By suggesting that challenging students’ thinking toward sustainability research
goes beyond teaching proven research methodologies for completing a thesis, this
chapter aimed to explore the role of distance learning and digitalization that has
sparked young higher education students’ interest in research activities to ensure
the successful functioning of sustainability science in the coming years. The chapter
included a case study to illustrate an approach to promote the elaboration of the thesis
in a Sustainability bachelor’s degree since students may not present sufﬁcient moti-
vations to graduate through scientiﬁc research. The main lesson of this case study
is that ICTs are attractive tools to speed up thesis progress. The nature of distance
education programs and the use of digital technologies is an invaluable competitive
Distance Learning and Digitization as a Means to Challenge Students’ …
703
advantage in training new scientists in the ﬁeld of sustainability research, mainly
due to their rapid adaptation to the digital demands of the students of generations
Y and Z. No doubt that distance learning has a relevance that it perhaps never had
before in the history of humankind. In addition to the evidence supported by biblio-
metric studies previously shown in this chapter, the development of ICTs will likely
inﬂuence future trends in sustainability research, so it is not surprising that distance
education should lead this development. The digital reengineering of higher educa-
tion institutions towards sustainability science should not be further delayed. The
role of distance education in higher education research has never been as highly
valued as it is today, especially after the unprecedented COVID-19 pandemic that
continuously forced educational institutions to modify, update, and apply strategies
and processes increasingly focused on using and managing technologies to generate
sustainability knowledge.
It is expected that distance education will increase its importance in the coming
years, inducing new generations of researchers and sustainability scholars to main-
tain ethical behaviors that allow the use of ICTs as support tools in activities such
as the organization of information, the management of references, the administra-
tion of activities, but not to create knowledge without a solid and demonstrated
base. Finally, it must be noted that particular concern in forming young sustain-
ability scientists is related to their academic and research integrity. ICT’s continuous
growth and development, particularly AI, is changing the way of conducting scien-
tiﬁc research; therefore, sustainability science students must learn the importance
of behaving with honesty, trust, transparency, and responsibility when conducting
sustainability research.
References
Agrawal R, Majumdar A, Majumdar K, Raut RD, Narkhede BE (2022) Attaining Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) through supply chain practices and business strategies: a systematic
review with bibliometric and network analyses. Bus Strateg Environ 31(7):3669–3687. https://
doi.org/10.1002/bse.3057
Alﬁrević N, Perović LM, Kosor MM (2023) Productivity and impact of Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs)-related academic research: a bibliometric analysis. Sustainability (Switzerland)
15(9). https://doi.org/10.3390/su15097434
Ammade S, Rahman AW, Syawal S (2022) Challenges and adaptation on online learning during
COVID-19 pandemic. J Edu Learn 16(3). https://doi.org/10.11591/edulearn.v16i3.20529
Andheska H, Suparno S, Dawud D, Suyitno I (2020) Writing motivation and the ability in writing
a research proposal of generation Z students based on cognitive style. J Educ Gift Young Sci
8(1). https://doi.org/10.17478/jegys.651436
Anholon R, Rampasso IS, Silva DAL, Leal Filho W, Quelhas OLG (2020) The COVID-19 pandemic
andthegrowingneedtotrainengineersalignedtothesustainabledevelopmentgoals.IntJSustain
High Educ 21(6). https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-06-2020-0217
Aretio LG (2019) The Need for digital education in a digital world. RIED-Rev Iberoam Educ
Distancia 22(2):9–22. https://doi.org/10.5944/ried.22.2.23911
Aretio LG (1989) La Educación. Teorías y Conceptos. Perspectiva Integradora. España: Editorial
Thomson-Paraninfo ISBN 84-283-1684-x
704
L. Velazquez et al.
Arias A, Constanza N, Guerrero KG, Beltrán JEP (2010) Educación a Distancia y Educación Virtual:
Una Diferencia Necesaria Desde La Perspectiva Pedagógica y La Formación Del Ser Humano.
Rev Investig UNAD 9(3). https://doi.org/10.22490/25391887.726
Avila-Lopez LA, Zayas C (2019) Desafíos de los docentes frente a la generación Millenial y Centen-
nial. In: Cuarta Revolución Industrial: Tecnologías En Las Áreas Administrativas, Contables,
Informáticas y de Negocios. Editorial Pearson, pp 19–31. ISBN 978-609-324-993-5
Barberà E, Badia A, Mominó JM (2001) La Incógnita de La Educación a Distancia. Editorial
Horsori, Barcelona. https://revistas.um.es/redu/article/view/11511
Barrios I (2023) Artiﬁcial intelligence and scientiﬁc writing: ethical aspects in the use of new
technologies. Med Clin y Soc 7(2):46–47. https://doi.org/10.52379/mcs.v7i2.278
Batdı V, Doğan Y, Talan T (2023) Effectiveness of online learning: a multi-complementary approach
research with responses from the COVID-19 pandemic period. Interac Learn Enviro 31(7).
https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2021.1954035
Begoña Tellería M (2004) Educación y nuevas tecnologías. Educación a Distancia y Educación
Virtual. Rev Teo Didác Cienc Soc 9:209–222 [Acceded 5 March, 2024 ]. ISSN: 1316-9505.
Available at: https://www.redalyc.org/articulo.oa?id=65200912
Bianchini S, Müller M, Pelletier P (2022) Artiﬁcial intelligence in science: an emerging general
method of invention. Res Policy 51(10):104604. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2022.104604
Block T, Prové C, Dehaene M, Abeele PV, Beeckmans L (2022) Understanding urban sustainability
from mode 2 science and transdisciplinary education: how master thesis Ateliers of the Ghent
Stadsacademie Tackle Wicked Issues. Environ Dev Sustain 0123456789. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s10668-022-02657-0
Bozkurt A, Karakaya K, Turk M, Karakaya Ö, Castellanos-Reyes D (2022) The impact of COVID-
19 on education: a meta-narrative review. TechTrends 66(5). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11528-
022-00759-0
Brenes Espinoza F (2004) Antecedentes de la educación a distancia. Available at: http://www.uned.
ac.cr/sep/aulavirtual/facilitadores/elaboracurso/mod1/antecedentesea.pdf
Brika SKM, Chergui K, Algamdi A, Musa AA, Zouaghi R (2022) E-learning research trends in
higher education in light of COVID-19: a bibliometric analysis. Front Psychol 12. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.762819
Brønn C, Brønn PS (2018) Sustainability: a wicked problem needing new perspectives.
Bus Strateg Sustain 1–18. https://www.crcpress.com/Business-Strategies-for-Sustainability/Bor
land-Lindgreen-Maon-Burbules; Nicholas C, Fan G, Repp P (2020) Five trends of education
and technology in a sustainable future. Geogr Sustain 1(2):93–97. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geo
sus.2020.05.001
Cebrián Serna M (2003) Enseñanza Virtual Para La Innovación Universitaria. Editorial Narcea,
Madrid. ISBN 84-277-1436-x
Coppo A (2020) Estrategias de Enseñanza Del Diseño Para Una Nueva Generación. El Rol Docente
y El Vínculo Con El Estudiante En El Marco de Las TIC´S. 53–67. Cuad Cent Estud Diseño
Comun 84:53–67. https://doi.org/10.18682/cdc.vi84.3743
Côrtes PL, Rodrigues R (2016) A bibliometric study on education for sustainability. Braz J Sci
Technol 3(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s40552-016-0016-5
Díaz Arce D (2023) Inteligencia Artiﬁcial versus Turnitin: Implicaciones Para El Plagio Académico.
Rev Cognosis 8(1):15–26. https://doi.org/10.33936/cognosis.v8i1.5517
Dirección de Planeación y Evaluación (2023) Elaborado con base en datos proporcionados por la
Dirección de Servicios Escolares, Universidad de Sonora. Available at: https://planeacion.uni
son.mx/
García Aretio L, García Blanco M (2016) Modelos educativos a distancia ligados a los desar-
rollos tecnológicos. Porta Linguarum, Monográﬁco I: 17–29 (2016). Universiadad Nacional de
Educacion a Distancia, UNED. ISSN: 1697-7467. https://doi.org/10.30827/Digibug.54085
García Aretio L (2002) La Educación a Distancia. De La Teoría a La Práctica. Barcelona: Ariel.
ISBN 978-84-344-2637-5
Distance Learning and Digitization as a Means to Challenge Students’ …
705
Gatto A, Drago C, Ruggeri M (2023) On the frontline—a bibliometric study on sustainability, devel-
opment, coronaviruses, and COVID-19. Environ Sci Pollut Res 30(15):42983–42999. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11356-021-18396-0
Gezahegn TH, Gedamu AD (2023) Supervisors’ and supervisees’ perception and perceived practice
of a process-oriented thesis written feedback: the case of Ethiopian universities. Heliyon 9(1).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e12865
Giatman M, Siswati S, Basri IY (2020) Online learning quality control in the pandemic Covid-19
era in Indonesia. J Nonformal Educ 6(2):168–175. https://journal.unnes.ac.id/nju/index/index
Grochowska R, Rolnictwa IE, Żywnościowej G (2014) Speciﬁcity of food security concept as a
wicked problem. J Agric Sci Technol B 4:823–831. https://doi.org/10.17265/2161-6264/2014.
10.010
Holmberg B (1995) The sphere of distance-education theory revisited. Available at: https://ﬁles.
eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED386578.pdf
Indana F, Pahlevi RW (2023) A bibliometric approach to Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
systematic analysis. Cogent Bus Manag 10(2). https://doi.org/10.1080/23311975.2023.2224174
Keegan D (1980) On deﬁning distance education. Distance Educ 1(1):13–36. https://doi.org/10.
1080/0158791800010102
Keegan D (1986) Chapter six: interaction and comunication. Distance Educ 1:89–107. https://doi.
org/10.1080/0158791800010102
Krenn M, Pollice R, Guo SY, Aldeghi M, Cervera-Lierta A, Friederich P, dos Passos G, Gomes,
et al (2022) On scientiﬁc understanding with artiﬁcial intelligence. Nat Rev Phys 4(12):761–769.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42254-022-00518-3
Kuleto V, Milena IP, Stanescu M, Ranković M, Šević NP, Păun D, Teodorescu S (2021) Extended
reality in higher education, a responsible innovation approach for generation Y and generation
Z. Sustainability (switzerland) 13(21):1–20. https://doi.org/10.3390/su132111814
Laher S, Bain K, Bemath N, de Andrade V, Hassem T (2021) Undergraduate psychology student
experiences during COVID-19: challenges encountered and lessons learnt. S Afr J Psychol
51(2). https://doi.org/10.1177/0081246321995095
Lara LR (2022) Análisis de Los Cursos Interactivos En Las Aulas Virtuales. In: Segundo Congreso
Virtual “Integración Sin Barreras En El Siglo XXI. Argentina
Leal Afanador JA (2013) La Ecología de La Formación E-Learning En El Contexto Universitario.
In: La educación superior a distancia y virtual en Colombia: Nuevas Realidades, pp 65–79.
Available at: https://searchworks.stanford.edu/view/10317904
Leal Filho W (2022) Pursuing sustainable development across disciplines: world sustainability
series. Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-04764-0_27
Lehtonen A, Salonen AO, Cantell H (2018) Climate Change education: a new approach for a
world of wicked problems. In: Sustainability, human well-being, and the future of education,
pp 339–74. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-78580-6_3
Liu Y, Sun X, Zhang P, Han P, Shao H, Duan X, Jiang J (2023) Generation Z nursing students’ online
learning experiences during COVID-19 epidemic: a qualitative study. Heliyon 9(4):e14755.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e14755
Lopezosa C (2023) ChatGPT y Comunicación Cientíﬁca: Hacia un uso de la Inteligencia Artiﬁcial
que sea tan útil como responsable. Hipertext.Net (26):17–21. https://doi.org/10.31009/hipertext.
net.2023.i26.03
Magallanes R, Katiuska K, Mora Rodríguez J, Aguas Veloz JF, Plúas Pérez L (2023) La Inteligencia
Artiﬁcial aplicada en la Innovación Educativa en el proceso de Enseñanza y Aprendizaje.
LATAM Revista Latinoamericana de Ciencias Sociales y Humanidades 4(2). https://doi.org/
10.56712/latam.v4i2.706
Maliarchuk O (2022) Young scientists in Ukraine: digital competences and grant programmers for
continuing research during wartime. Educ Econ Manag 65(3). https://doi.org/10.33119/EEIM.
2022.65.4
706
L. Velazquez et al.
Man J, Zhan J (2023) Ensuring sustainable academic development of L2 Postgraduate Students and
MA Programs: Challenges and Support in Thesis Writing for L2 Chinese Postgraduate Students.
Sustainability (Switzerland) 15(19)
Maqbulin A (2021) Problems of online learning during pandemic. Inovasi-Jurnal Diklat Keagamaan
15(1):1–13. https://doi.org/10.52048/inovasi.v15i1.205
Medina Romero MA (2023) Las Herramientas de Inteligencia Artiﬁcial Orientadas Al Fortalec-
imiento Del Desarrollo de Investigaciones Cientíﬁcas y Académicas: El Caso de Smartpaper.AI
en América Latina. Cienc Lat 7(3):7542–7553. https://doi.org/10.37811/cl_rcm.v7i3.6743
Mindigulova AA, Vikhman V, Romm MV (2023) the use of artiﬁcial intelligence in education:
opportunities, limitations, risks. In: International conference of young specialists on micro/
nanotechnologies and electron devices, EDM 2023-June: 2000–2003. https://doi.org/10.1109/
EDM58354.2023.10225245
Mishra M, Desul S, Santos CAG, Mishra SK, Kamal AHM, Goswami S, Kalumba AM, Biswal R, da
Silva RM, Dos Santos CAC, Baral K (2023) A bibliometric analysis of sustainable development
goals (SDGs): a review of progress, challenges, and opportunities. Environ Dev Sustain 7:1–43.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10668-023-03225-w. Epub ahead of print. PMID: 37362966; PMCID:
PMC10164369
Moore MG (1977) On a theory of independent study. Fern Universitat, Hagen (West Germany)
Munguia N (2023) COVID-19 and its inﬂuence on sustainable development goal 4: Latin America
and Caribbean Region. In: Leal Filho W, Aguilar-Rivera N, Borsari BRB, de Brito P, Andrade
Guerra B (eds) SDGs in the Americas and Caribbean Region. Implementing the UN sustainable
development goals–regional perspectives. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
91188-1_97-1
Nichols M (2003) A theory for e-learning. Educ Technol Soc 6(2):1–10. Available at: https://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:15606373
Obidat AH (2022) Bibliometric analysis of global scientiﬁc literature on the accessibility of an
integrated e-learning model for students with disabilities. Contemp Educ Technol 14(3). https://
doi.org/10.30935/cedtech/12064
Passerini K, Granger MJ (2000) A developmental model for distance learning using the internet.
Comput Educ 34(1):1–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0360-1315(99)00024-X
Pederneiras YM, Meckenstock J, Carvalho AIC, Barbosa-Póvoa AP (2022) The wicked problem
of sustainable development in supply chains. Bus Strateg Environ 31(1):46–58. https://doi.org/
10.1002/BSE.2873
Perry J (2015) Climate change adaptation in the world’s best places: a wicked problem in need of
immediate attention. Landsc Urban Plan 133:1–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2014.
08.013
Peter O (1994) Otto Peters on distance education: the industrialization of teaching and learning.
Psychology Press, Hove, UK
Peters O (2002) La educación a distancia en transición. Nuevas tendencias y retos. Universidad de
Guadalajara, México. ISBN 9789702702375
Poddubnaya TN, Zadneprovskaya EL, Voevodina SS, Ilyinova NA, Ramazanovna F, Alexandrovna
E (2021) Distance learning experience in the context of globalization of education (Experiencia
de Aprendizaje a Distancia En El Contexto de La Globalización de La Educación). Propósitos
y Representaciones 9(2):985
Pradilla CA, Bento J, da Silva, and Juliane Reinecke, (2022) Wicked problems and new ways of
organizing: how fe y alegria confronted changing manifestations of poverty. Res Soc Organ
3:93–114
Pryshlakivsky J, Searcy C (2013) Sustainable development as a wicked problem. Top Saf Risk
Reliab Qual 21:109–128. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-5515-4_6/COVER
Qadir J (2023) Engineering education in the era of ChatGPT: promise and pitfalls of generative AI
for education. In: IEEE global engineering education conference, EDUCON 2023. https://doi.
org/10.1109/EDUCON54358.2023.10125121
Distance Learning and Digitization as a Means to Challenge Students’ …
707
Quinto JB (2022) Seize the day or seize theses? the challenges in undergraduate thesis writing.
Issues Educ l Res 32(4)
Ranabahu N (2020) Wicked’ solutions for ‘wicked’ problems: responsible innovations in social
enterprises for sustainable development. J Manag Organ 26(6):995–1013. https://doi.org/10.
1017/jmo.2020.20
Ranieri J, Guerra F, Cilli E, Caiazza I, Gentili N, Ripani B, Canzio M, Coletti E, Quassoni A,
Niutta S, Colicchia L et al (2021) Buffering effect of e-learning on generation Z undergraduate
students: a crosssectional study during the second COVID-19 lockdown in Italy. Mediterr J Clin
Psychol 9(2):1–17. https://doi.org/10.13129/2282-1619/mjcp-3051
Ranjbari M, Shams Esfandabadi Z, Zanetti MC, Scagnelli SD, Siebers PO, Aghbashlo M, Peng
W, Quatraro F, Tabatabaei M (2021) Three pillars of sustainability in the wake of COVID-
19: A systematic review and future research agenda for sustainable development. J Clean
Prod 15(297):126660. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.126660. Epub 2021 Mar 9. PMID:
34785869; PMCID: PMC8580193
Rasli A, Tee M, Lai YL, Tiu ZC, Soon EH (2022) Post-COVID-19 strategies for higher education
institutions in dealing with unknown and uncertainties. Front Educ 7. https://doi.org/10.3389/
feduc.2022.992063
Rittel HWJ, Webber MM (1973) Dilemmas in a general theory of planning. Policy Sci 4(2):155–169
Sadouki F (2023) Investigating challenges in thesis writing for non-native MA students of English:
the case of second-year MA students of English in Algeria. Bull Transilvania Univ Brasov. Ser
IV: Philo Cult Stud 89–104. https://doi.org/10.31926/but.pcs.2023.65.16.2.7
Salvagno M, Taccone FS, Gerli AG (2023) Can artiﬁcial intelligence help for scientiﬁc writing?
Crit Care 27(1):1–5. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13054-023-04380-2
Sanchez-Santillan M, Paule-Ruiz M, Cerezo R, Alvarez-García V (2016) MeL: Modelo de
adaptación dinámica del proceso de aprendizaje en eLearning. Ann Psychol [online]. 32(1):106–
114 [Acceded March 04, 2024]. ISSN: 0212-9728. Available at: https://www.redalyc.org/art
iculo.oa?id=16743391012
Sanjaya MS, Pandey S (2021) Research trends in online distance learning during the COVID-19
pandemic. Distance Educ 42(4):494–519. https://doi.org/10.80/01587919.2021.1986373
Scheiter K, Gerjets P (2007) Learner control in hypermedia environments. Educ Psychol Rev
19(3):285–307. https://doi.org/10.1007/S10648-007-9046-3
Simpson M, Anderson B (2012) History and heritage in open, ﬂexible and distance education.
J Open Flex Dist Learn 16(2). Available: http://journals.akoaotearoa.ac.nz/index.php/JOFDL/
issue/view/19
Spaulding S (2022) Assessing the implicit bias research program: comments on Brownstein,
Gawronski, and Madva versus Machery. Wiley Interdisciplinary Rev Cogn Sci 13(5):1–6. https://
doi.org/10.1002/wcs.1614
Suazo Galdames I (2023) Inteligencia Artiﬁcial En Investigación Cientíﬁca. Sci Commun Rep.
https://doi.org/10.32457/scr.v3i1.2149
Times Higher Education (2023) Impact Rankings 2023. Available at: https://www.timeshighereduc
ation.com/impactrankings
Trejo Medina D (2022) Analíticos empresariales para ejecutivos, 2a edn. DIDAC, Mexico
Treve M (2021) What COVID-19 has introduced into education: challenges facing Higher Education
Institutions (HEIs). High Educ Pedagog 6(1):212–227. https://doi.org/10.1080/23752696.2021.
1951616
U.N. General Assembly (2015) Transforming our world: the 2030 agenda for sustainable
development. A/RES/70/1 15900 (September):1–35
UI GreenMetric (2023) The top 10 world’s most sustainable universities in 2022 UI green metric
world university rankings. https://greenmetric.ui.ac.id/
UNESCO (2020) Education for Sustainable Development: a roadmap. https://doi.org/10.54675/
YFRE1448. ISBN978-92-3-1000394-3. Available at: https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000374802
708
L. Velazquez et al.
Velazquez L, Munguia N, Platt A (2000) Fostering P2 practices in Northwest Mexico through
InterUniversity collaboration. J Clean Prod 8(5):433–437. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959-652
6(00)00047-0
Wahyu A, Simanullang RH (2020) Student stress due to online learning during the Covid-19
pandemic. Jurnal Aisyah : Jurnal Ilmu Kesehatan 5(2). https://doi.org/10.30604/jika.v5i2.346
Wang H, Fu T, Du Y, Gao W, Huang K, Liu Z, Chandak P et al (2023) Scientiﬁc discovery in the
age of artiﬁcial intelligence. Nature 620(7972):47–60. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-062
21-2
Warren SJ, Churchill C (2022) Strategic, operations, and evaluation planning for higher education
distance education. Distance Educ 43(2):239–70. https://doi.org/10.1080/01587919.2022.206
4821
Wedemeyer CA (1971) Independent study. In: Deighton LC (ed) The encyclopedia of education,
vol 4. Free Press, New York, pp 548–557
Online Courses and Educational
Networking: Ontological Approach
to Integration of SD-Linked Outcomes
into Advanced-Learning Courses
Jintao Yang, Kirill Savrassov, Nikolai Gorbatchev, and Tatsiana Tkalich
Abstract Online courses and educational networking present both challenges and
opportunities for advanced learning educational content management. With the
continuous evolution of global markets and the need for individuals to stay updated
with the latest advancements to maintain competitiveness, the integration of sustain-
abilityintothecurriculumbecomescrucial.Thisintegrationensuresthatfuturegener-
ations are equipped with the necessary knowledge and abilities to tackle sustain-
ability challenges and build a more sustainable world. Particularly, the utilization
of online courses has led to a shift in information-seeking behavior, resulting in a
decreased demand for physical books and printed materials in traditional university
libraries. This shift necessitates adjustments in collection development strategies,
leading libraries to prioritize electronic resources to better support online learning.
This paper includes a case study on the integration of Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs)-linked outcomes into advanced learning online courses. These courses, such
as “Foundations of Insurance-linked Securities (ILS)”, “Investment Management”,
“Project Management”, and others, were delivered to professionals from Europe,
Americas, and Africa. The case study demonstrates the integration of knowledge
domain ontology into the interdisciplinary course library to enhance the effective-
ness and efﬁciency of educational content updating and support teaching, learning,
and research activities. By incorporating domain knowledge ontology, educators and
J. Yang (B)
University of Latvia, Riga, Latvia
e-mail: jy22003@edu.lu.lv
K. Savrassov
Phoenix CRetro Ltd., London, UK
e-mail: k.savrassov@phoenix-re.co.uk
N. Gorbatchev
International Institute of Management and Business & Minsk Branch of Plekhanov, Russian
University of Economics, Minsk, Belarus
e-mail: ngorbachev@sbmt.by
T. Tkalich
School of Business of Belarusian State University, Minsk, Belarus
e-mail: tkalich@sbmt.by
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_39
709
710
J. Yang et al.
course developers can effectively structure and organize relevant information across
various disciplines to create courses that comprehensively address the interconnected
issues and targets outlined in the SDGs. This approach enhances the coherence,
integration, and overall impact of interdisciplinary courses focused on SDGs.
1
Introduction
Since the introduction of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the global
community has been actively striving to integrate sustainability into operations across
all sectors (UN 2015). The objectives aim to tackle worldwide issues such as poverty,
inequity, environmental degradation, and climate change, while also advocating for
peace and fairness (Leal Filho et al. 2023a). In the era of online learning, tradi-
tional libraries have undergone a transformation in response to the evolving needs of
learners and educators. This transformation extends beyond the conventional concept
oftraditionallibrariesasrepositoriesofphysicalbookstoencompasstheirpivotalrole
in facilitating access to digital resources, supporting online educational initiatives,
and promoting sustainable development through knowledge dissemination.
The integration of sustainability into the curriculum and its inherent connection
to the role of libraries in sustainable development underscores the libraries’ signiﬁ-
cance as enablers of global progress. Libraries serve as catalysts for sustainability by
curating and providing access to educational materials that promote a deeper under-
standing of sustainability challenges and solutions. Moreover, through their support
of online courses with sustainability-focused content, libraries actively contribute
to the dissemination of knowledge essential for addressing environmental, social,
and economic sustainability issues. By fostering awareness and understanding of
sustainable development goals and initiatives, traditional libraries become instru-
mental in shaping a generation of learners equipped to engage with and address
the multifaceted challenges of sustainability, thus reinforcing their pivotal role
in advancing sustainable development through educational networking and online
learning platforms.
The implementation of knowledge domain ontology within the educational
content management system further emphasizes the pivotal role of traditional univer-
sity libraries in enabling sustainable development. By integrating knowledge domain
ontology, libraries can facilitate the seamless organization and dissemination of
educational content related to sustainable development goals. This approach not only
enhances the efﬁciency of content management but also reinforces the interconnect-
edness of multidisciplinary courses aiming to address SDGs. Through the system-
atic integration of SDG outcomes into educational resources, libraries can actively
contribute to the cultivation of a comprehensive understanding of sustainability chal-
lenges and solutions among students and educators. This proactive approach aligns
with the broader mission of traditional libraries in supporting the advancement of
sustainable development by providing a structured framework for the integration of
Online Courses and Educational Networking: Ontological Approach …
711
SDGs across diverse disciplines, thereby enriching the educational experiences and
fostering a culture of sustainability within academic communities.
Online courses and educational networking have transformed the education sector,
providing accessible and ﬂexible learning opportunities for learners globally (Castro
and Tumibay 2021). Currently, they play a critical role in facilitating lifelong learning
by providing accessible and ﬂexible educational opportunities for individuals of all
ages (Tzenios 2022). Online courses and educational networking enable individ-
uals to engage in learning activities regardless of their location, work schedules,
or personal commitments. This accessibility is particularly beneﬁcial for working
professionals, parents, and individuals with mobility constraints (de Souza Rodrigues
et al. 2021). Online courses provide opportunities for individuals to acquire new
skills, expand their knowledge base, and enhance their professional qualiﬁcations.
This can be particularly valuable for career advancement and transition into new
ﬁelds.
Online courses and educational networking can help bridge the gap in access
to quality education, a goal aligned with SDG 4 (Quality Education). By lever-
aging digital platforms, individuals from diverse geographical locations and socio-
economic backgrounds can access educational resources and courses, contributing to
the goal of universal education. Educational networking platforms facilitate collabo-
rative learning, knowledge sharing, and the exchange of best practices among global
communities. This aligns with the essence of several SDGs, including SDG 17 (Part-
nerships for the Goals), which emphasizes the importance of global collaboration to
achieve sustainable development. Moreover, online courses contribute signiﬁcantly
to the promotion of decent work and economic growth as outlined in Sustainable
Development Goal 8 (SDG 8). Online courses provide global access to educational
resources, allowing individuals from diverse backgrounds and geographical locations
to acquire market-relevant skills and knowledge, thus fostering inclusive economic
growth. Online courses can also be designed to educate learners about environ-
mental sustainability, climate action, and responsible consumption and production,
supporting SDG 13 (Climate Action) and SDG 12 (Responsible Consumption and
Production), among others.
However, these changes also present challenges for university libraries, primarily
related to information management, copyright, and digital divides. Mixing traditional
and online resources is crucial for libraries to support diverse learning styles and
meet evolving student needs. Curricular alignment with online courses and collab-
orations with faculty members can enhance the libraries’ role in academic success.
As a networking platform, online courses allow libraries to share resources and best
practices, facilitating continuous improvement. The emergence of open educational
resources (OER) also provides opportunities for libraries to support affordable and
accessible education.
This study contains a case study of the integration of SDGs-linked outcomes
into the CPD-certiﬁed advanced-learning online courses library (“Foundations of
Insurance-linked Securities”, “Investment Management”, “Project Management”
and others), which was attended by numerous professionals from Europe, the Amer-
icas, and Africa. These courses have implemented several contemporary approaches
712
J. Yang et al.
to e-learning to enhance the learning experience of professionals: open educational
resources, interactive learning modules, virtual networking opportunities, blended
learning approaches, and adaptive learning technologies. By incorporating knowl-
edge domain ontology, the course organizes various content in a structured and
interconnected manner, enabling learners to navigate and retrieve relevant course
materials more effectively. This approach can also facilitate the linking of related
concepts, topics, and resources, providing a more cohesive and comprehensive
learning experience for the participants (Leal Filho et al. 2023b).
Sustainability outcomes integrated into courses’ curricula require interdisci-
plinarity as they are addressing complex sustainability challenges. They involve
a variety of interconnected factors, such as social, economic, environmental, and
technological aspects. These factors get within the domains of various disciplines,
and a holistic approach is needed to effectively understand, analyze, and address
sustainability issues. Interdisciplinary collaboration allows for the integration of
diverse perspectives, expertise, and methodologies, leading to more comprehen-
sive and effective solutions that account for the multifaceted nature of sustainability
outcomes.
Educational communities dedicated to online courses continually generate and
reﬁne a wealth of educational content, which holds signiﬁcant value for students
and researchers alike. The diverse and evolving nature of this content necessitates
robust management processes to ensure its accessibility, relevance, and applicability
across various educational contexts. Knowledge domain ontology serves as a crucial
tool in enhancing the management of this continually expanding educational content.
By structuring and organizing the content according to domain-speciﬁc knowledge,
ontology facilitates efﬁcient categorization, retrieval, and utilization of educational
resources.
2
Methodology of Managing the Educational Content
The continuous exchange of data, information, and knowledge within educational
communities in forums, social networks, and video conferencing indeed leads to a
signiﬁcant increase in the volume of content (Haleem et al. 2022). This growing
body of content can certainly be categorized as “prospective educational informa-
tion resources” as it holds the potential to be utilized in content management systems
for the creation or updating of advanced learning courses (Lungu 2022). The accu-
mulation of diverse perspectives, insights, and resources within these educational
communities serves as a valuable pool of content that can enrich the development
of electronic courses. By leveraging this wealth of prospective educational infor-
mation resources, content management systems can be enriched with up-to-date,
relevant, and diverse content, enhancing the quality and relevance of electronic
courses (Komleva and Vilyavin 2020). The effective utilization of this content within
contentmanagementsystemsrequiresthoughtfulcuration,validation,andintegration
Online Courses and Educational Networking: Ontological Approach …
713
Fig. 1 Engagement of educational and methodical network communities’ members in cultivating
personal competencies. Source Based on the diagram with author’s revisions (Gorbatchev et al.
2011)
processes. These processes can help ensure the accuracy, reliability, and pedagogical
value of the content that is being added or updated within electronic courses.
Figure 1 illustrates the three levels of interaction among members of a networking
educational and methodical community in the development of personal competencies
are as follows:
Personal Level: At this level, individual members engage in direct interaction
to enhance their personal competencies. This may involve self-study, reﬂection,
skill development, and personal development activities aimed at improving one’s
competencies within the educational and methodical context.
Shared Knowledge Networks Level: This level involves the collaborative
exchange of knowledge, ideas, and resources among members within shared
networks. Members actively participate in sharing best practices, insights, and exper-
tise with their peers. This level fosters a culture of knowledge sharing and collective
learning, contributing to the enhancement of personal competencies through the
collective intelligence of the network.
Educational Networking Communities Level: At this level, members engage
within formal or informal educational communities, such as online forums, social
networks, or professional groups. Within these communities, members interact,
collaborate, and support each other in the development of personal competencies.
Educational communities provide a platform for peer learning, mentoring, and the
exchange of valuable educational resources that contribute to the enrichment of
individual competencies within the educational and methodical domain.
These levels collectively represent the multi-faceted nature of interaction within
networking educational and methodical communities and their signiﬁcant impact on
the development of personal competencies.
714
J. Yang et al.
However, the personiﬁcation of authorship in networking communities is a topic
of debate within the ﬁeld of knowledge management. In networked environments
such as online forums, social media platforms, and collaborative workspaces, the
lines of authorship can become blurred due to the ease of sharing, remixing, and
co-creating content (Hung and Yuen 2010). This has led to discussions around issues
such as proper attribution, intellectual property rights, and the impact of collaborative
authorship on the value and integrity of knowledge within these communities (Paske-
vicius 2021). Currently, different perspectives exist on whether the personiﬁcation
of authorship enriches or hinders knowledge management in these environments.
One of the promising technologies that may be effective for educational content
management in educational networking communities is the knowledge domain
ontology (Saito et al. 2007). By providing a formal representation of knowledge
domains, ontology facilitates the organization, structuring, and retrieval of educa-
tional content, as well as enhancing intellectual property management for educational
content within networking communities.
Knowledge domain ontology is a formal representation of knowledge within a
speciﬁc domain or subject area (Zouaq and Nkambou 2009). It involves capturing the
concepts,entities,andtheirinterrelationshipsinastructuredandstandardizedmanner
(Sattar et al.2020). This representationenables theorganization, retrieval, andutiliza-
tion of knowledge within the domain, and the development of advanced search and
recommendation systems in various applications, including online courses. Ontolo-
gies play a crucial role in the Semantic Web, and their importance and recognition
have grown signiﬁcantly due to being seen as the solution for achieving interoperable
semantics in contemporary information systems (Konys 2019).
The history of knowledge domain ontology in educational content management
can be traced back to the advancements in the ﬁeld of information technology and the
evolutionofthesemanticweb.Knowledgedomainontologybecameakeycomponent
of educational content management systems as it allows for the representation of
domain-speciﬁc knowledge and relationships in a structured and machine-readable
format (Gladun et al. 2012).
The concept of ontology in the context of knowledge representation and manage-
ment has its roots in the ﬁeld of philosophy, but it gained prominence in the ﬁeld of
computer science and artiﬁcial intelligence in the 1990s (Grimm et al. 2011). The
term “ontology” is used to refer to a formal representation of knowledge within a
speciﬁc domain, including the concepts, entities, and the relationships between them
(Guarino 1995).
In the context of educational content management, the use of knowledge domain
ontology gained traction as educators and content creators sought more effective
ways to organize, manage, and disseminate educational materials. By representing
the knowledge domain using an ontology, educational content management systems
could become more intelligent and capable of understanding the semantic meaning
of the content, enabling better search, retrieval, and organization of educational
resources.
The Semantic Web initiative, led by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C),
has been instrumental in promoting the use of ontologies for representing and
Online Courses and Educational Networking: Ontological Approach …
715
sharing knowledge on the web (Rajapaksha and Kodagoda 2008). This initiative
contributed to the development of standards and technologies, such as the Resource
Description Framework (RDF) and the Web Ontology Language (OWL), which are
crucialforbuildingandutilizingknowledgedomainontologiesineducationalcontent
management systems (Davies et al. 2006).
As a result, knowledge domain ontology has become an integral part of advanced
educational content management systems, allowing for more precise categorization
and organization of educational resources, personalized learner experiences, and
interoperability between different educational platforms and systems (Tarus et al.
2018). With the advent of digital technology and the increasing volume of digital
resources, the need for more advanced and ﬂexible methods of knowledge organi-
zation became apparent. Knowledge domain ontology emerged as a solution to this
challenge by providing a way to represent knowledge in a machine-readable and
structured format, allowing for more precise categorization, search, and retrieval of
information.
The relationship between traditional libraries and knowledge domain ontology
can be seen in the transition from physical to digital knowledge organization and
management (Aung et al. 2022). While traditional libraries rely on human-created
classiﬁcation systems, knowledge domain ontology enables the representation of
knowledge in a way that can be understood and processed by computers (Ferilli and
Redavid 2020). This transition has facilitated the development of digital libraries and
online knowledge repositories, where ontology-based approaches are used to cate-
gorize and organize digital resources more effectively. Knowledge domain ontology
has inﬂuenced the development of semantic web technologies, linked data initiatives,
and digital library standards, leading to improved interoperability, search capabilities,
and the ability to integrate diverse sources of information.
Over the past decade, ontologies have been extensively utilized across diverse
ﬁelds including biomedicine, ﬁnance, engineering, law, and cultural heritage, as
indicated by a recent review of ontology engineering (Tudorache 2020).
Knowledge domain ontology of educational content developed for a course
involves organizing knowledge in a hierarchical and structured manner, which leads
to several beneﬁts in the context of online course content updating (Chen et al. 2013).
At the stage of the design and development of online course curricula, knowledge
domain ontology can enhance the works of educators by providing a clear framework
for organizing and sequencing learning objectives and content due to its structured
representation of knowledge within a speciﬁc domain (Lefebvre et al. 2005).
With a well-deﬁned ontology, it becomes easier to identify areas where content
needs updating (Pandey et al. 2024). This enables the automation of certain aspects of
content updating, such as identifying outdated information or adding new knowledge
componentsbasedonthechangesintheﬁeld.Ontologiescanbeusedtocreateperson-
alized learning paths for students based on their individual needs and learning goals
(Chen 2008). This enhances the quality of the educational experience by providing
tailoredcontentupdatesandrecommendations.Thisapproachalsofacilitatesinterop-
erabilityandreusabilityofeducationalcontentacrossdifferentcoursesandplatforms.
In the result, course owners get efﬁcient updating and sharing of content, leading to
716
J. Yang et al.
higher quality and more comprehensive educational materials. Implementation of a
knowledge domain ontology for the course library facilitates the creation of sophis-
ticated semantic search and recommendation systems, aiding in the identiﬁcation of
pertinent content updates aligned with speciﬁc learning goals and needs.
Ontology can facilitate the identiﬁcation of the most active and knowledgeable
experts, which may belong both to educators and learners, in speciﬁc ﬁelds of study
within the networking community. By analyzing the qualitative and quantitative
relationships between ontology units and individual competencies, the system can
pinpointmemberswhopossessexpertiseinrequestedﬁelds.Ontology-drivencompe-
tencies management can facilitate the identiﬁcation of potential collaborators or
mentors within the networking community. Members with complementary compe-
tencies can be matched for collaborative projects, knowledge sharing, and mutual
support.
There are several international projects that collaborate for the creation of
SDG-related taxonomies and ontologies (OLS n.d.; UN n.d.). The development
of a taxonomy and ontology for SDGs involves the categorization and structuring
of concepts and relationships related to sustainable development, including SDG
indicators. Several international projects collaborate to create and maintain such
taxonomies and ontologies to facilitate the understanding and implementation of
SDGs across various domains. As an example, the United Nations Economic and
Social Council’s efforts to develop an ofﬁcial taxonomy and ontology framework for
the SDGs (UNEP n.d.). This framework aims to provide a standardized approach for
classifying and organizing data and information related to sustainable development,
thereby enabling better monitoring and reporting on progress towards achieving the
SDGs. The collaborative development of SDG-related taxonomies and ontologies
plays a crucial role in promoting a common understanding and implementation of
sustainable development initiatives at both national and global levels.
The application of SDG ontology in advanced and lifelong educational projects
holds signiﬁcant promise for advancing sustainable development initiatives. By
utilizing an SDG ontology, lifelong educational projects can effectively align their
objectives and activities with the speciﬁc targets and indicators outlined in the SDGs.
3
Application of Knowledge Domain Ontology
to Interdisciplinary Content Management
This approach was implemented for a thematically related set of CPD-certiﬁed
advanced learning courses (Project Management, Investments Management and
Fundamentals of Insurance-Linked Securities and others). These courses are based
on a uniﬁed repository of ontology-driven library of educational content (reposi-
tory). The main tasks of this were to integrate the SDG-related outcomes into the
courses, to provide the in-time updating of educational content, to involve the educa-
tional networking community in updating the content library, to provide individual
Online Courses and Educational Networking: Ontological Approach …
717
learning passes to learners and to enhance the courses’ quality via knowledge sharing
and reviewing using educational collaboration and networking. As the basis for
this, an educational content library based on knowledge domain ontology was struc-
tured using a layered architecture that incorporates ontology-based categorization,
retrieval, updating and management of educational resources (Fig. 2). This approach
leverages the following key components to optimize the handling of educational
content libraries.
A. Domain Ontology: This layer includes the representation of knowledge
domains, concepts, and relationships within the educational content space. Concepts
and relations are deﬁned to categorize educational resources based on subject matter,
topics, and learning objectives.
B. Resource Metadata: Educational resources are tagged with metadata linked to
theontology,includingconcepts,topics,andknowledgedomains.Thislayermanages
the storage and retrieval of resource metadata, enabling efﬁcient categorization and
indexing of educational content.
C. Educational Resources: This layer stores various types of educational content,
such as texts, multimedia, simulations, and interactive materials, as well as content
CPD 
Requirements to 
Educational 
Courses
Requirements of 
Learners
Requirements of 
labor market 
(employers) to 
skills and 
competences
Curriculum of set of courses
Expandable (updatable) 
knowledge domain model
Metadata (keywords) for 
managing the repository
COURSES REPOSITORY (text, multimedia, video)
Managing descriptors
Quantitive
Qualitative
Review video lectures
General video courses
Special video courses and 
trainings
Curriculum discipline A
Curriculum discipline A
Special course X
Expert
A’
Expert
B’
Expert 
A’
Expert 
B’
Subject 
A’’
Subject 
B’’
Subject 
C’’
Subject 
A’’
Subject 
B’’
Subject 
C’’
Subject 
A’’
Subject 
B’’
Subject 
C’’
Collaboration toolsets
Alternative review 
courses content
Collaboration toolsets
Alternative curriculum 
courses 
Trainings for 
developing the 
required competences 
and skills
Development of 
courses with 
knowledge domain 
driven updates
Subject 
A’’
Subject 
B’’
Subject 
C’’
Subject 
A’’
Subject 
B’’
Subject 
C’’
Fig. 2 Implemented architecture of educational content library based on knowledge domain
ontology. Source Based on the diagram with author’s revisions (Gorbatchev et al. 2011)
718
J. Yang et al.
generated by learners and educators (networking communities’ content). Resources
are associated with metadata that aligns with the ontology, allowing for structured
organization and retrieval based on knowledge domains.
Ontology-Based Search Engine: A search engine is integrated with the ontology to
provide users with the ability to explore and discover educational resources based on
speciﬁc knowledge domains, concepts, and relationships. Search queries are mapped
to ontology concepts for accurate resource retrieval.
User Proﬁling: This layer captures information about user competencies, learning
preferences, and knowledge domains of interest. This data is utilized to provide
personalized recommendations for educational resources aligned with the user’s
competencies and learning goals.
Intellectual Property Management: This layer ensures compliance with intellec-
tual property rights by managing access controls, usage rights, and permissions
for educational resources. Ontology-based metadata facilitates the enforcement of
copyright and licensing requirements.
Usage Analytics: This layer captures usage data and interactions with educational
resources, providing valuable insights into resource popularity, user engagement, and
competency development trends. In perspective, analytics will be linked to ontology
taxonomy to measure competency growth in speciﬁc knowledge domains.
Another advantage of the implementation of a knowledge domain ontology in
a course management system is the integration of SGD-related outcomes. This
approach was previously suggested by various research in relation to other ﬁelds. For
example, a knowledge organization system was introduced in Joshi et al. (2021). It
incorporates an ontology representing the components of the SDG indicator frame-
work. This framework presently encompasses 17 Goals, 169 Targets, and 231 distinct
indicators,alongwithover450associatedstatisticaldataseriesmanagedbytheglobal
statistical community to oversee advancements towards the SDGs (Fig. 3).
The knowledge domain ontology integrates Sustainable Development Goal
(SDG)-related outcomes into a comprehensive online course library focusing on
“Foundations of Insurance-linked Securities,” “Investment Management,” “Project
Management,” and other relevant subjects. The top-level model of the ontology
encompasses the following key elements:
Courses’ Experts: This component of the model identiﬁes and categorizes the
subject matter experts responsible for developing and delivering the courses within
the library. It speciﬁes their areas of expertise and contributions to the content.
Indicators of Courses: This element encompasses the various qualitative and quan-
titative indicators used to assess the effectiveness and relevance of the courses. It
includes metrics related to learning outcomes, engagement, user satisfaction, and
overall impact.
Users’ Satisfaction: This part of the model captures the feedback and satis-
faction levels of the learners who engage with the courses. It may include user
ratings, reviews, and survey data to gauge overall satisfaction and identify areas for
improvement.
Online Courses and Educational Networking: Ontological Approach …
719
Fig. 3 A Fragment of knowledge domain ontology at high-level of details. Source Developed by
authors
Case Studies: The ontology incorporates case studies relevant to the courses,
providing real-world examples and applications to enhance learning and under-
standing of the subject matter.
Courses’ Outcomes: This component outlines the speciﬁc learning outcomes and
objectives of each course, aligning them with SDG-related goals and targets.
The integrated model facilitates the alignment of course content with SDG-related
outcomes, ensuring that the courses not only provide valuable knowledge but also
contribute to broader sustainability and development objectives.
Alignment of educational courses’ library with SDG ontology provides several
beneﬁtstocourses,selectedforthisresearch.CPD-certiﬁedadvanced-learningonline
courses library (“Foundations of Insurance-linked Securities”, “Investment Manage-
ment”, “Project Management” and others) are oriented on ﬁnance and business
learners, insurance brokers, local and international authorities as well as on layers
and managers. SDG ontology assists in aligning the curriculum with the speciﬁc
goals and targets of the SDGs.
This ensures that learners receive education that is directly linked to global sustain-
ability objectives, thereby fostering a sense of responsibility and awareness of the
broader societal and environmental challenges. Another advantage is facilitating the
interdisciplinary approach to the course library. An SDG ontology facilitates a deeper
720
J. Yang et al.
understanding of the interconnectedness of sustainable development issues across
various topics and outcomes. This engagement also fosters a collaborative approach
to education and empowers individuals to contribute meaningfully to sustainable
development efforts within their communities to create new SDG-oriented educa-
tional content and to update current courses’ elements. Finally, by integrating SDG-
relatedconceptsandindicatorsintoeducationaladvocacyefforts,coursestakeholders
can work towards inﬂuencing policies that support sustainable development at local,
national, and global levels.
4
Feedback Analysis Methodology
The effectiveness of the proposed methods was examined from the perspective of
the learners. During the preparatory phase, the most crucial ﬁndings concerning the
concepts of SDGs in both global and regional contexts were identiﬁed based on a
review of current research. The research survey’s objective is to evaluate the extent of
awareness, comprehension, and integration of SDGs both prior to and following the
completion of the courses. Its aim is to investigate respondents’ viewpoints, actions,
and attitudes regarding these concepts. The survey involved the selection of a diverse
and representative sample of participants from various regions, industries, and back-
grounds. The ﬁrst step in the process was to design the questionnaire, which consisted
of a mix of closed-ended and open-ended questions. The closed-ended questions were
aimed at collecting quantitative data, and included multiple choice questions and
Likert scale questions where respondents could rate their level of agreement with a
statement on a scale of 1–5. The open-ended questions were aimed at collecting qual-
itative data and allowed respondents to provide more detailed and nuanced answers.
After the survey responses were collected, the data was analyzed using descrip-
tive statistics. Descriptive statistics was applied to summarize the data and provide
an overview of the respondents’ opinions. Finally, the results of the survey were
compiled into a report that summarized the ﬁndings and provided insights into the
current state of knowledge and attitudes among insurance professionals towards the
outcomes related to SDGs.
The questionnaire included 38 questions, thematically grouped into 5 sections:
– General section (location, professional group etc.)
– Awareness and understanding of SDGs (familiarity with the speciﬁc goals and
targets, perceived relevance of SDGs to the course content)
– Perceived impact and signiﬁcance (learners’ opinions on the importance of inte-
grating SDG-related topics into the course curriculum, as well as the potential
impact of such integration on their professional development and contribution to
sustainable development efforts)
– Integration of SDG concepts (the learners’ perceptions of the extent to which the
course addresses issues related to sustainable development, and how effectively
these concepts are integrated into the content)
Online Courses and Educational Networking: Ontological Approach …
721
– Recommendations and Feedback (suggestions for enhancing the integration of
SDG-related topics into the course curriculum based on their learning experience
and understanding of the subject matter).
The survey was distributed to the selected respondents through available chan-
nels among course alumni. Once the data collection phase was completed, the
collected responses were compiled and analyzed. This involved using statistical anal-
ysis methods, such as frequency analysis, cross-tabulation, and descriptive statistics,
to gain insights into the research objectives. The research ﬁndings are presented
below in the form of descriptive summaries, charts, and tables.
5
Results of the Survey on Educational Content Quality
in the CPD-Courses’ Library
Information was gathered through a survey that was distributed to graduates of the
CPD-certiﬁed advanced-learning online courses library (“Foundations of Insurance-
linked Securities”, “Investment Management”, “Project Management” and others)
using the random sampling technique. Limitations of selection are related to the focus
of the group of alumni mostly on the insurance and ﬁnance sectors. The geographic
distribution of respondents can be found in Fig. 4.
Signiﬁcantly, the survey revealed that Europe (30%) and Asia (27%) were
the regions with the highest representation among the participants. The research
also garnered participation from professionals in other regions such as Africa and
Australia/Oceania, contributing to a more diverse and global perspective.
Africa
20%
America
17%
Asia
27%
Australia and 
Oceania
6%
Europe
30%
Africa
America
Asia
Australia and Oceania
Europe
Fig. 4 Location of interviewees (total 181 people)
722
J. Yang et al.
Table 1 Professional
segmentation of courses’
alumnus
Participants
% in sample (%)
Academia
12
Asset Managers
11
Brokers
11
Fintech, Insurtech
7
Law
5
Public Sector
2
(Re-)insurers
35
Sovereign Pools
12
UN Agencies
5
The professional segmentation of survey participants is available in Table 1.
The ﬁndings reveal that the largest segment of participants, at 35%, consisted
of (re-)insurers, underscoring thematic orientation of selected advanced-learning
courses, as well as a considerable industry interest in the correlation between SDGs
and ILS. Additionally, it is worth noting that respondents included representatives
from sovereign pools across different states, academic researchers, asset managers,
and brokers, each comprising over 10% of the participants. The diversity of profes-
sionals involved in the survey is a positive indication of widespread interest in
courses.
On the question “Did the e-learning course cover the relationship between ﬁnan-
cial instruments and the SDGs?”, over 90% of participants answered “yes, to very
high extend”. The overwhelmingly positive response regarding the coverage of the
relationship between ﬁnancial instruments and the SDGs indicates that the e-learning
course is effectively integrating content that aligns with the principles and objectives
of sustainable development.
The high percentage (89,4%) of respondents who found the networking oppor-
tunities provided by the courses to be valuable indicates that networking has
a signiﬁcantly positive impact on the learning experience. This suggests that
networking opportunities within the eLearning environment are perceived as beneﬁ-
cial and contribute to enhancing the overall learning experience for the alumni. The
networking opportunities not only provided value to the alumni but also had a tangible
impact on the educational content. This underscores the signiﬁcance of networking
as a mechanism for facilitating meaningful connections, knowledge sharing, and
the generation of ideas that contribute to the evolution of educational offerings. The
incorporation of modiﬁcations as a result of networking suggests that the institution is
committed to aligning the course content with SDG-related outcomes, leveraging the
insights and experiences shared by alumni to integrate relevant and current content
related to sustainable development goals.
The high percentage of respondents, over 85%, emphasizing the importance of
providing education and capacity building to stakeholders as a means to promote
greater alignment with Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and drive positive
Online Courses and Educational Networking: Ontological Approach …
723
social impact leads to several signiﬁcant conclusions. The emphasis on education
implies a recognition that collaboration and alignment of efforts are essential for
advancing the integration of insurance-linked securities with SDGs. This suggests
a willingness to work with stakeholders towards common understanding and goals
related to sustainable development, potentially fostering a collaborative approach
across the insurance-linked securities market.
The application of an SDG-oriented knowledge domain ontology for educa-
tional content updating can serve as a powerful mechanism for connecting the
previous conclusions regarding the alignment of educational offerings and initia-
tives with SDGs, with the speciﬁc emphasis on education and capacity building
within the ﬁnancial and insurance professionals. This enabled to strategically embed
educational materials and resources focused on insurance-linked securities, sustain-
able ﬁnance, and related SDG-aligned concepts within the curriculum. This facil-
itates targeted education and capacity building efforts, addressing the identiﬁed
need for stakeholders to have a comprehensive understanding of these instruments
and their potential contributions to sustainable development, as emphasized by the
respondents.
6
Discussion
Implementing a knowledge domain ontology to enhance the management of educa-
tional content for online courses with a focus on SDGs can have several potential
impacts on the traditional libraries:
Updated Curriculum and Resources: The implementation of the knowledge
domain ontology can lead to the incorporation of new and updated content related
to SDGs in the online courses. This may prompt the library to acquire or produce
additional resources such as books, journals, and digital materials that align with
the SDGs, in order to support the curriculum and research needs of the students and
faculty.
Shift in Collection Development: There might be a shift in collection develop-
ment strategies within the library to align with the educational content and research
needs related to SDGs. This may involve evaluating the current collection to ensure
it adequately covers topics related to sustainable development and environmental
studies.
Expanded Digital Resources: With a focus on online courses, there may be an
increased demand for digital resources within the library. This could lead to the
expansion of electronic databases, journals, and other online materials to support the
evolving educational content.
Collaboration with Academic Departments: The library might foster collaboration
with academic departments to curate resources and support research related to SDGs.
This could involve liaising with faculty to ensure that the library’s collections and
services align with the knowledge domain ontology and the educational goals of the
university.
724
J. Yang et al.
Enhanced Information Literacy Programs: The implementation of the knowledge
domain ontology may result in a need for enhanced information literacy programs
within the library, speciﬁcally tailored to support the understanding and utilization
of resources related to SDGs. This could include workshops, research guides, and
instructional materials focused on sustainable development topics.
Theapplicationoftheknowledgedomainontologyenablestheeducationalinstitu-
tion to strategically embed educational materials and resources focused on insurance-
linked securities, sustainable ﬁnance, and related SDG-aligned concepts within the
curriculum. As the next step in the implementation of SDG-related ontology on
educationalcontentmanagementforCPD-certiﬁedadvanced-learningonlinecourses
library, we consider cooperation with other educational institutions and libraries.
Collaboration with other educational institutions and libraries provides an opportu-
nity to share best practices, experiences, and insights related to the integration of
SDG-related principles into educational content. This cross-institutional knowledge
exchange can help in identifying innovative approaches, addressing challenges, and
leveraging collective expertise.
Collaborative efforts can enable the alignment of curriculum across institutions
to ensure consistency in integrating SDG-related ontology. By standardizing certain
aspects of educational content related to sustainable development goals, institutions
can work together to develop a cohesive approach that reﬂects a uniﬁed commitment
to promoting sustainability through education.
7
Conclusions
This paper emphasizes the transformative role of education in addressing global
sustainability challenges. It highlights the need for ongoing adaptation in educa-
tional content and delivery methods, particularly within university library systems,
to better align with the evolving habits and demands of learners. As demonstrated
by the case studies of SDGs-linked online courses, incorporating knowledge domain
ontologies fosters a more structured and integrated approach to course development.
This strategy not only facilitates the updating and effectiveness of educational mate-
rial but also supports broader teaching, learning, and research activities. The success
of the courses examined underscores the beneﬁts of this approach for professionals
across the globe, showcasing a viable path for educational institutions to contribute to
a more sustainable world by equipping learners with the knowledge and skills neces-
sary to navigate and lead in dynamic market environments. As markets continue
to evolve, the continuous integration of such innovative educational practices is
essential for fostering an informed and adaptive workforce capable of advancing the
Sustainable Development Goals.
The inclusion of a knowledge domain ontology in the university courses’ library,
as presented in this paper, supports a powerful conclusion that such a framework
is instrumental in enhancing interdisciplinary connections among courses. This
ontology allows for a systematic categorization of information according to different
Online Courses and Educational Networking: Ontological Approach …
725
disciplines and subjects, facilitating easier and more effective access to relevant
knowledge across various ﬁelds.
Learners get beneﬁts from an educational structure that is not only tailored to
the comprehensive and interconnected nature of the SDGs, but also reﬂective of
the multidisciplinary approach required to address complex global challenges. By
incorporating this ontology into the library’s course offerings, educators are afforded
a robust mechanism to update content swiftly and efﬁciently, ensuring that learners
receive the most current and relevant information.
The paper’s case studies demonstrate that through the application of knowledge
domain ontologies, educational institutions and online courses can signiﬁcantly
improve the coherence and delivery of their course libraries, ultimately enriching
the learning experience and empowering individuals to contribute meaningfully to
sustainability goals. Moreover, the ontology supports the ability of these institutions
to maintain a competitive edge by providing a forward-thinking, adaptive educa-
tional environment that is responsive to the needs of a diverse, global professional
audience.
References
Aung TT, ThetSu A, Khaing MM, Thant KS, Tin HHK (2022) The digital library web service
system by using domain ontology. Indian J Eng 19(51):196–205
Castro MDB, Tumibay GM (2021) A literature review: efﬁcacy of online learning courses for higher
education institution using meta-analysis. Educ Inf Technol 26(2):1367–1385. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10639-019-10027-z
Chen C-M (2008) Intelligent web-based learning system with personalized learning path guidance.
Comput Educ 51(2):787–814. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2007.08.004
Chen Y-J, Chu H-C, Chen Y-M, Chao C-Y (2013) Adapting domain ontology for personalized
knowledge search and recommendation. Inf Manag 50(6):285–303. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
im.2013.05.001
Davies J, Studer R, Warren P (2006) Semantic Web technologies: trends and research in ontology-
based systems. Wiley
de Souza Rodrigues MA, Chimenti P, Nogueira ARR (2021) An exploration of eLearning adoption
in the educational ecosystem. Educ Inf Technol 26(1):585–615. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-
020-10276-3
Ferilli S, Redavid D (2020) An ontology and knowledge graph infrastructure for digital library
knowledge representation. Digital Libraries: The Era of Big Data and Data Science, Cham.
Gladun A, Rogushina J, Schreurs J (2012) Domain ontology, an instrument of semantic web
knowledge management in e-learning. Int J Adv Corp Learn (iJAC) 5(4):22–31
Gorbatchev N, Malchenko N, Larisa S (2011) Implementation of collaboration management in
networking educational and methodical community. Econ Stat Inf 6:46–52
Grimm S, Abecker A, Völker J, Studer R (2011) Ontologies and the semantic web. In:: Handbook
of semantic web technologies
Guarino N (1995) Formal ontology, conceptual analysis and knowledge representation. Int J Hum
Comput Stud 43(5):625–640. https://doi.org/10.1006/ijhc.1995.1066
Haleem A, Javaid M, Qadri MA, Suman R (2022) Understanding the role of digital technologies
in education: a review. Sustain Oper Comput 3:275–285. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.susoc.2022.
05.004
726
J. Yang et al.
Hung H-T, Yuen SC-Y (2010) Educational use of social networking technology in higher education.
Teach High Educ 15(6):703–714. https://doi.org/10.1080/13562517.2010.507307
Joshi A, Morales LG, Klarman S, Stellato A, Helton A, Lovell S, Haczek A (2021) A knowledge
organization system for the united nations sustainable development goals. The Semantic Web,
Cham
Komleva N, Vilyavin D (2020) Digital platform for creating personalized adaptive online courses.
Open Educ 24(2):65–72
Konys A (2019) Knowledge repository of ontology learning tools from text. Procedia Comput Sci
159:1614–1628. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2019.09.332
Leal Filho W, Krishnapillai M, Minhas A, Ali S, Nagle Alverio G, Hendy Ahmed MS, Naidu R,
Prasad RR, Bhullar N, ShariﬁA, Nagy GJ, Kovaleva M (2023a) Climate change, extreme events
and mental health in the Paciﬁc region. Int J Clim Change Strategies Manag 15(1):20–40. https://
doi.org/10.1108/IJCCSM-03-2022-0032
Leal Filho W, Simaens A, Paço A, Hernandez-Diaz PM, Vasconcelos CRP, Fritzen B, Mac-Lean
C (2023b) Integrating the sustainable development goals into the strategy of higher education
institutions. Int J Sust Dev World 30(5):564–575. https://doi.org/10.1080/13504509.2023.216
7884
Lefebvre B, Gauthier G, Tadié S, Huu Duc T, Achaba H (2005) Competence ontology for domain
knowledge dissemination and retrieval. Appl Artif Intell 19(9–10):845–859. https://doi.org/10.
1080/08839510500234222
Lungu V (2022) Prospective pedagogy: conceptual and methodological fundamentals. International
Science Group. http://cris.utm.md/bitstream/5014/1778/1/Prospective_Pedagogy.pdf
OLS (n.d.) Sustainable Development Goals Interface Ontology. https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontolo
gies/sdgio. Accessed 1 Dec 2023
Pandey R, Srivastava N, Bajpai AK (2024) Enabling trust in an e-learning ontology through
provenance. In: Architecture and technological advancements of education 4.0. IGI Global,
pp 380–425
Paskevicius M (2021) Educators as content Creators in a diverse digital media landscape. J Interact
Media Educ 18(1):1–10. https://doi.org/10.5334/jime.675
Rajapaksha SK, Kodagoda N (2008) Internal structure and semantic web link structure based
ontology ranking. In: 2008 4th international conference on information and automation for
sustainability. IEEE, pp 86–90
Saito A, Umemoto K, Ikeda M (2007) A strategy-based ontology of knowledge management
technologies. J Knowl Manag 11(1):97–114. https://doi.org/10.1108/13673270710728268
Sattar A, Surin ESM, Ahmad MN, Ahmad M, Mahmood AK (2020) Comparative analysis of
methodologies for domain ontology development: a systematic review. Int J Adv Comput Sci
Appl 11(5)
Tarus JK, Niu Z, Mustafa G (2018) Knowledge-based recommendation: a review of ontology-based
recommender systems for e-learning. Artif Intell Rev 50(1):21–48. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10
462-017-9539-5
Tudorache T (2020) Ontology engineering: Current state, challenges, and future directions.
Semantic Web 11:125–138. https://doi.org/10.3233/SW-190382
Tzenios N (2022) Learner-centered teaching. Int J Curr Res Sci Eng Technol (4):916–919
UN (n.d.) Sustainable Development Goals Taxonomy. https://metadata.un.org/sdg/about?lang=en.
Accessed 1 Dec 2023
UN (2015) Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. https://sustai
nabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld/publication. Accessed 1 Dec 2023
UNEP (n.d. SDG Interface Ontology. https://www.unep.org/explore-topics/sustainable-develo
pment-goals/what-we-do/monitoring-progress/sdg-interface-ontology. Accessed 1 Dec 2023
Zouaq A, Nkambou R (2009) Evaluating the generation of domain ontologies in the knowledge
puzzle project. IEEE Trans Knowl Data Eng 21(11):1559–1572. https://doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.
2009.25
Online Courses and Educational Networking: Ontological Approach …
727
Jintao Yang University of Latvia, Latvia—Master of Management, Ph.D. student in Economics
and Management at the University of Latvia. Area of scientiﬁc interests: sustainable development,
foreign direct investment.
Kirill Savrassov Chief Executive of Phoenix CRetro Ltd. (UK), MSc. in ﬁnancial management
and LLB in international law. Seasoned (re-)insurance industry professional (25+ years) with
proven track record for deal making and strategic leadership. Convenor of the ﬁrst ever global
education & qualiﬁcation programme in Insurance-Linked Securities (ILS). Visiting lecturer
to various institutions on the topic of Alternative Risk Transfer including London School of
Economics and Political Science (LSE) and Central European University. Particular interests
comprise: ILS, Sovereign Disaster Risk Transfer, ECIS insurance market development, Parametric
solutions in catastrophe reinsurance and Risk transfer to private capital markets, Chinese Belt and
Road Initiative and its critical infrastructure protection solutions.
Nikolai Gorbatchev Ph.D., International Institute of Management and Business (IIMB), Head of
Research and IT Department and Minsk Branch of Plekhanov Russian University of Economics,
Head of Laboratory of Web Design and Programming (Belarus).
Graduated from the Belarusian State University, Faculty of Philosophy and Economics. Grad-
uated from graduate school at the Moscow State University of Economics, Statistics and Infor-
matics (MESI), majoring in mathematical and instrumental methods of economics. Defended his
dissertation on the topic “Development of economic and mathematical methods for managing
educational information resources”, Ph.D. in Economic Sciences. Area of scientiﬁc interests:
mathematical modeling of educational content management, blended education and elearning,
protection of infrastructure facilities from the risks of natural disasters, and problems of sustain-
able development.
Tatsiana Tkalich Dr., Professor, School of Business of Belarusian State University, Head of
Department of Digital systems and technologies of School of Business of Belarusian State Univer-
sity.
Graduated from the Minsk Radio-engineering University with a degree in “Automated control
systems”, postgraduate studies at St. Petersburg State University with a degree in “Probability
Theory and Mathematical Statistics”, defended her dissertation in the specialty “Detection of time-
limited disorder of the Poisson process” in 1994. Associate Professor of the specialty “Informatics,
control and computer technology.” Defended her doctoral dissertation on Mathematical and instru-
mental methods of economics, specializing in “Methodological foundations for assessing the
economic efﬁciency of information systems” in 2015. Professor specializing in economics. Profes-
sional interests: digital economy, economic efﬁciency of information systems, IT management,
mathematical modelling in the ﬁeld of economics and innovation.
Contributions of Academic Libraries,
Librarians, and Information Science
to Education for Sustainable
Development Research
and Implementation: A Canadian
Undergraduate Example
Martina King
Abstract There is a growing intersection between library and information science
(LIS) and sustainability research. This paper explores the potential of LIS research
for advancing sustainability education inquiry spanning areas such as structuring
curriculum, pedagogical approaches, information behavior, and cultural collections.
Through an examination of recent reviews of LIS scholarship on sustainability, it
underscores the imperative for further investigation into the intersection between
LIS and sustainability, particularly in education and cultural domains. This paper
delineates potential avenues for future research, highlighting a gap in the literature
pertaining to the implementation of sustainable development education goals within
higher education institutions at the interdisciplinary level. Drawing from illustrative
examples, this paper contributes to addressing this gap by showcasing how LIS schol-
arship, including Scholarship of Teaching and Learning (SoTL), has been leveraged
and applied by a subject librarian, teacher, and researcher in sustainability education.
The context of this implementation is within sustainability courses that are part of
an interdisciplinary sustainability certiﬁcate at an undergraduate university.
Keywords Sustainable development goals · Sustainability competencies ·
Teaching and learning · Libraries · Librarians · Information science · Information
behavior · Culture · Research
M. King (B)
MacEwan University, John L. Haar Library, Edmonton, AB, Canada
e-mail: kingm10@macewan.ca
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_40
729
730
M. King
1
Introduction
In 2015, the United Nations (UN) Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) provided a
road map towards global sustainability (UN 2015). The SDGs included several goals
to which libraries and the ﬁeld of library and information science (LIS) contribute.
SDG number four, Quality Education, underpins the rest of the SDG framework as
a key goal for a sustainable society. Access to quality education and information
is a core value of librarianship, as is sustainability and the use of information and
education to facilitate sustainable choices (American Library Association 2024).
In 2002, the International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions
(IFLA) issued a statement on libraries and sustainable development, recognizing the
essential role of libraries and the access to information they provide for sustainable
development. In 2022, IFLA added a statement on the essential nature of libraries
in providing sustainable development information and called on governments to
consult library information to inform sustainability decisions. These are some of the
signposts along the road to developing the current interest of libraries, librarians, and
LIS in sustainability (IFLA 2002, 2022).
The largest overlap between the mission of academic libraries and the UN SDGs
is in education. A 2023 OCLC survey of over 1700 library staff around the world
reported that SDG Quality Education, was identiﬁed as the top goal where responders
felt libraries could have the greatest impact (Connaway et al. 2023, p. 275). The
scholarship of teaching and learning (SoTL) studying sustainability education is a
growing area of applied research for universities and academic libraries (Kamińska
et al. 2022a, b; Fia et al. 2023).
LIS research on sustainability has focused on sustainable libraries and collections,
including how open access contributes to sustainable development. However, there
are other areas where LIS research can contribute to sustainability, notably on educa-
tion and cultural topics. There is indication in the literature that the LIS research on
sustainability still has room for development and expansion (Meschede and Henkel
2019; Kahlid et al. 2021; Repanovici et al. 2021; Kamińska et al. 2022a, b).
Fia et al. identiﬁed tension between institutional sustainability goals and inter-
departmental implementation of teaching sustainability and suggested the ﬁeld could
beneﬁt from further investigation of teaching implementation at this level (2023,
p. 622). There is potential for LIS research in general, and for information literacy
research in particular to contribute to sustainability education research and to bridge
the gap (Fia et al. 2023) identiﬁed if LIS research is applied to sustainability educa-
tion. This potential is illustrated in this paper using the experience of a librarian
involved in teaching and researching an interdisciplinary sustainability certiﬁcate
program at MacEwan University, a Canadian undergraduate university. The goal of
this discussion is to provide insight into how libraries, librarians, and LIS research
can contribute to sustainability educational research efforts to ultimately improve
sustainability education and better equip the citizens of the future with the ability to
achieve the SDGs.
Contributions of Academic Libraries, Librarians, and Information …
731
2
Library and Information Science Research
on Sustainability
Owing to the interdisciplinary nature of both LIS and sustainability, in 2013, Chowd-
hurysuggestedthat“sustainabilityshouldbecomeamainstreamresearchtopicwithin
information studies” (2013, p. 617). However, Meschede and Henkel’s (2019) review
of LIS literature found that Chowdhury’s suggestion had not yet come into being.
Meschede and Henkel found that although the number of LIS publications addressing
at least one of the main pillars of sustainability (social, economic, or environmental)
had risen in the last ten years, it was not keeping pace with the relative promi-
nence of this topic in other scientiﬁc discourses (2019, p. 1364). Further, Meschede
and Henkel found most publications they reviewed focused on the sustainability
of libraries themselves as opposed to other contexts (2019, p. 1363). Kahlid et al.
conducted a review of sustainable development literature in LIS and found that there
was a focus on the green nature of library buildings and digital libraries as opposed to
other actions or practices (2021, p. 6). This is part of the “Green Library Movement”
which according to Kaminska et al. in their discussion of collaboration insights,
includes not only green library buildings and practices, but also sustainability of
collections, including content, acquisition, and preservation (2022, pp. 16–818).
Kaminska et al.’s (2022a) review included a much larger sample size (751 papers
p. 5) of LIS literature on sustainability topics versus (Meschede and Henkel’s 2019)
sample size (81 papers p. 1358). The main categories of literature identiﬁed by
Kamińska et al. (2022a, b) include buildings, information and information commu-
nication technology (ICT), collections, education, culture and other. The study found
that although articles focused on buildings were still well represented in the literature,
that the area with the most intensive research interest explores information and ICT
topics related to sustainability and LIS (2022, p. 26). According to Kaminska et al.,
the focus on education is growing and frequently connected with information and
ICT topics in the scientiﬁc literature (2022, p. 26). They differentiate between studies
on the topic of information, which focus on topics such as access to information and
information society and those focusing on ICT and green sustainable information
systems (2022, p. 7). Additionally, culture was identiﬁed by Kaminska et al. as a
newly developing area of LIS sustainability research (2022, p. 18).
Kaminska et al. also describe the focus in the LIS research on education as incor-
porating sustainable thinking and concepts, mostly environmental, into information
literacy teaching (2022 p. 14). This is the reverse of the librarian author’s experi-
ence discussed in this paper where IL teaching was incorporated into sustainability
curriculum and IL research, pedagogy and knowledge was used to enhance and
inform teaching sustainability. Repanovici et al. (2021) conducted a review of studies
investigating what IL can contribute to sustainability educational. This is an area that
warrants future investigation. Kahlid et al. identiﬁed educating both information
professionals and the public on sustainability as a major challenge and priority for
libraries (2021, p. 6). These reviews all indicate there is signiﬁcant room for growth
732
M. King
and development of LIS research on sustainability in general and particularly studies
focusing on the areas of education and culture.
3
How IL Research Can Inform Sustainability Curriculum
Planning and Research
In 2014, Jankowska et al. interviewed over 200 academic library and LIS school
employeesandstudents(Jankowskaetal.2014).Theauthorsreportthatwhenrespon-
dents were asked how engaged academic libraries should be in campus sustainability
teaching and curriculum activities, a total of 95% felt libraries should be engaged
to some degree (p. 9). The author of this paper, as sustainability subject librarian,
was involved with the initial planning for the Sustainability Certiﬁcate at MacEwan
University. There were discussions with representatives from the University’s Ofﬁce
of Sustainability as to how sustainability content and learning could best be integrated
into existing academic programs. LIS literature advocates for integrated approaches
forteachingtransferableskillssuchasinformationliteracies(Wang2011).Therefore,
the author supported the university’s approach to integrating sustainability learning,
which involved having sustainability content embedded into existing courses in
various programs as well as having speciﬁc interdisciplinary sustainability courses
as core requirements for the certiﬁcate. The sustainability (SUST) courses are open
to students in any program and can be taken as electives and put together with disci-
plinary courses identiﬁed as including sustainability content to achieve the sustain-
ability certiﬁcate. As with information literacies, sustainability competencies beneﬁt
from being contextualized within the student’s main area of study. This was some-
thing that students are encouraged to do in the SUST courses by relating what they
are learning about sustainability to their home academic discipline in discussions and
assignments. The vast body of research into best practices for embedding IL instruc-
tion into disciplinary programs is relevant to research on sustainability education
because of the shared interdisciplinary and transferable nature of IL and sustainability
literacy.
4
Researching Teaching IL and Sustainability: Similar
Challenges and Pedagogical Considerations
The SDGs form a framework for understanding the work that lies ahead to achieve
sustainability. To contribute to the SDGs, people in society must gain the compe-
tencies, skills, knowledge, and attitudes required to act to address sustainability
challenges. Towards this, a set of key sustainability competences has developed in
higher education (Redman and Wiek 2021). Kaminska et al. based on the conclu-
sions of studies they reviewed, posit that information literacy, “can be seen as a key
Contributions of Academic Libraries, Librarians, and Information …
733
to the economic, social, and cultural development of communities, institutions and
even nations” (2022, p. 15). Traditionally, IL, including digital literacy and aspects
of critical thinking, have been seen as key to developing sustainability competencies
that contribute to sustainable decision-making. Repanovici et al. (2021) investigated
the connection between IL and sustainable thinking in their study that examined
IL literature via a quantitative literature scope and corroborated what they found
in the literature with a qualitative research study involving students taking an IL
course where sustainability information was integrated. Their study’s results section
demonstrated a positive correlation between IL learning and students’ ability to
develop sustainable thinking and behavior. Repanovici et al. (2021) identiﬁed the
importance of libraries offering both IL and sustainability curricula to contribute
to developing sustainability competencies. This suggests that integrating IL into
sustainability focused curriculum could potentially have similar beneﬁts.
There are deep similarities between the challenges of teaching key sustainability
competencies and IL concepts as represented by the Association of College and
Research Libraries (ACRL) Framework for Information Literacy for Higher Educa-
tion (2015). This is because the sustainability competencies and information literacy
framework have a lot in common, including that they espouse transferable skills
that are to be used across disciplines and modiﬁed for use in different contexts, be
they personal and/or professional areas of life. These frameworks include not just
skills, but attitudes, ethics, ways of thinking, being, and approaching situations. To
gain information and sustainability competencies the learner must ﬁrst understand
the complex information and ecological, economic, social, and cultural systems they
are a part of. Kominska et al. have preliminarily deﬁned “sustainable information
literacy” as expanding traditional IL abilities to include sustainable thinking, such as
being aware of the impact of one’s information choices on the pillars of sustainability
(2022, pp. 14–15). An example of how IL pedagogy can be applied to teaching the
sustainability competency of systems thinking is that the SUST 201 course included
a module on systems thinking. In this module students were learning how to map a
personal system they were a part of and understand how the facets impacted each
other. Having them map a personal system instead of a system more removed from
their daily life drew on the author’s experience as a librarian teaching information
systems. When teaching students about academic information systems, examples
are used that students are more familiar with such as streaming media services to
illustrate how academic databases work. Students commented in course evaluations
that they appreciated it when the sustainability concepts were teaching to real-life
examples they could identify with.
Using problem-based approaches to teach and research information literacy, by
starting with an information need, is embedded into library and information science.
Information literacy has been deﬁned by the ACRL as “recognizing when informa-
tion is needed and knowing how to locate, evaluate, and use it effectively” (2000).
Research has suggested that problem-based approaches to IL can help students
contextualize their learning (Diekema et al. 2011). Using a problem-based approach
is also good ﬁt for sustainability learning because there are so many pressing sustain-
ability problems to be solved, with climate change being the largest and most
734
M. King
universal. In the SUST 201 course, students were asked to apply what they learned
via readings and other materials to class discussions on sustainability problems that
they identiﬁed as personally relevant. Research supports the use of problem-based
learning in sustainability education (Cörvers et al. 2016; Lozano et al. 2017).
Some of the pedagogical approaches employed in the SUST 201 course were
active and applied learning, both mainstays of library instruction as practicing
applying information skills is key to being able to effectively use them. In addi-
tion, community engaged learning was used. For example, the ﬁnal change maker
assignment asked students to take a small but meaningful action of their choice in
their community to contribute towards sustainability and the SDG’s as a change
maker. They were asked to write a report situating this action in the course litera-
ture and reﬂecting on it. To support their research in addition to library resources,
students were introduced to open published resources. Making students aware of
open resources highlighting the inequalities present in traditional publishing systems.
Knowledge of open information also allowed students to start to become aware
of the impact their information consumption and dissemination choices as citizens
and budding scholars has regarding moving towards a more sustainable system of
information.
Participating in community engaged learning helped students to apply their
sustainability knowledge and skills to affect change. This encourages students to
take action toward the SDG’s as the UN has encouraged the world to do in their
proclaimed decade of action beginning in 2020. There is evidence that community
engaged learning pedagogies are effective for sustainable learning (Lozano et al.
2017). Combining these pedagogies with self-reﬂection is key to their effectiveness.
A growing body of work focuses on the importance of reﬂection for sustainability
education (Howell 2021; Konrad et al. 2021; Sandri 2022). Reﬂection has long been
identiﬁed as a key pedagogy for developing IL skills (Jacobs 2008). Each week in
SUST 201, students were asked to reﬂect on a question related to what they had read
and were learning before leaving class each week.
In 2021, the author conducted a SoTL investigation to examine pedagogy for
teaching and learning sustainability competencies in the Sustainability Challenges
(SUST 301) course at MacEwan University (Munro and King 2022). Students in the
course were asked to complete pre and post assessments of the level their of sustain-
ability competencies using a tool adapted from Molderez and Fonseca (2018). Pre and
post self-assessment methodology is also used to study student development of infor-
mation literacy. Students wrote a reﬂection on what they learned, their learning expe-
rience and the experience of conducting the self-assessment as part of their research
participation. The authors found that the problem-based, and community engaged
pedagogies did contribute to students’ increased learning of sustainability competen-
cies and students felt the self-assessment and reﬂective process contributed to their
awareness of how they had developed their sustainability competencies throughout
the course (Munro and King 2022, p. 23).
The community partner project, which was the main assignment for the SUST 301
course in the SoTL study, connected students with a local organization to help them
address a sustainability challenge the organization faced. This project illustrated to
Contributions of Academic Libraries, Librarians, and Information …
735
students how they can continue to contribute to sustainability beyond their studies
by bringing what they learn into their work civic life. Student reﬂection on this
assignment as well as their self-assessment of their development of sustainability
competencies revealed ways for them to continue to gauge areas of sustainability
knowledge they will need to develop as they encounter new challenges, setting them
up for life-long learning (Munro and King 2022, pp. 11–12). The connection between
education and life-long learning is something that was also identiﬁed by Repanovici
et al. as a commonality in LIS research literature (2021, p. 5). Colomer et al. (2020)
suggest that reﬂective learning supports students in developing their ability to reﬂect
on their competencies. Knowing their strengths empowers people to recognize their
ability to impact their contexts. Through this recognition, they are better able to
contribute to sustainability throughout their lives. Life-long learning has been iden-
tiﬁed as key to being able to constantly adapt to make progress with the complex
problems facing our planet and achievement of sustainability (Bates et al. 2022).
5
How Information Behavior Research Can Inform
Research on Sustainability Education
The goal of interdisciplinary research on misinformation and its role in contributing
to climate change denial is to understand the circumstances and behaviors related
to information seeking/consumption on the topic of climate change. Additionally,
the purpose is to understand how knowledge building and critical thinking interacts
with worldview and fear of economic and social change in this complex problem
(Ranney and Velautham 2021). The problem of misinformation and pseudoscience
is contributing to the climate crisis because it threatens human motivation to adapt. It
has been suggested that libraries have a role to play in combating misinformation on
climate change via both provision of open access information and teaching critical
thinking, information and digital ﬂuency (Appleton and Woolley 2023).
Similarly, the ﬁeld of health education has been grappling with the widespread
dissemination of misinformation in relation to vaccines, which came to a head during
the COVID pandemic. After the World Health Organization (WHO) declared a
pandemic in 2020, they identiﬁed the problem of the “infodemic”, which they deﬁned
as, “too much information including false or misleading information in digital and
physical environments during a disease outbreak” (2022). Speciﬁcally, the problem
of misinformation is partially addressed by a core tenant of information literacy,
evaluation of credibility of information sources, as discussed by Savolainen (2023)
in their study of online social media misinformation relating to vaccines. In both
these areas of study that impact sustainability, information science has suggested
ways to better educate on these topics and how to package scientiﬁc information so
that it is more likely to combat misinformation. Moreover, access to open published
medical research, something academic libraries advocate for and facilitate, creates
736
M. King
an environment that allows scientists and members of the public to use these trust-
worthy sources to debunk misinformation on social media platforms, as suggested by
Timothy Caulﬁeld, Canada Research Chair in Health Law and Policy at the Univer-
sity of Alberta (2020). In this way, information behavior research contributes to
sustainability research on how to educate the public on sustainability topic.
The ways that people understand health and well-being are intricately linked to
successful sustainability of humans on earth. The role that information literacy plays
in global understanding and action towards solving problems of health and climate
change is undeniable. The author incorporated research studying the information
behavioral aspect of climate change denial into the SUST 201 course. This provided
students with a background understanding of how people interact with information
on sustainability topics. This background knowledge supported students in carrying
out the interpersonal competency and skill development activity where students had
a discussion regarding a sustainability topic with someone they knew held differing
views. The purpose of this exercise was to practice ﬁnding common ground and
connecting with people on a personal level in relation to sustainability topics. This
activity builds on information science’s understanding that many people turn to those
they know for information they are seeking (Evans et al. 2010).
6
Collections, Cultural, and Community Connection
Contributions
In addition to the original sustainability pillars of environment, economic and social,
culture has been identiﬁed as a relatively new, and not fully explored area of sustain-
able development research (Kamińska et al. 2022a, b, pp. 16–819). In a recent
review of 102 research publications on libraries and sustainability, Mathiasson and
Jochumsen identiﬁed only three studies focused on cultural subjects (2022, p. 1287).
This presents an opportunity for LIS research in sustainability, as libraries are
cultural institutions recently concerned with collecting and making available cultural
knowledge. Additionally, information behaviors are heavily inﬂuenced by culture.
Many libraries provide reading guides or guides to key literature on sustain-
ability. A good example of a local perspective is the University of British Columbia’s
(UBC) library’s Climate and Climate Change in the Okanagan guide. An example
of expanding the topic to include cultural aspects of sustainability is the X¯ wi7x¯ wa
Library Indigenous Land Based Activist guide which includes not only Indigenous
authors’ works on this topic but information on campaigns and movements as well.
These guides assist with local sustainability research, education and public activism.
An important aspect of understanding sustainability is not just people’s physical
connection with the land, but also their cultural and spiritual connection. Many
factors have contributed to separating people from being connected with the land
they live on, including colonialism, industrialization, and urbanization.
Contributions of Academic Libraries, Librarians, and Information …
737
Libraries in North America and globally have more recently been focused on
researching and introducing initiatives to collect and give voice to Indigenous authors
who were previously unheard in academic discourse (Hurley et al. 2017). There has
also been a recent emphasis on research and initiatives focused on decolonizing
library collections and processes (Blume and Roylance 2020). These missing voices
in libraries are due to systemic inequalities in our society. Bringing such voices
into the discourse around sustainability contributes to the social equity required for
sustainability. It is hard to properly value what is not well understood, so students
need to learn about Indigenous peoples’ diverse knowledge, ways of thinking, and
ways of being in relation to the land. MacEwan University library has an Indigenous
Collections Policy aimed at increasing the library’s collection of Indigenous authors,
and has also created a highly visible First Voices print collection aimed at facilitating
access to contemporary literature by Indigenous authors.
These areas of LIS research and practice can contribute to sustainability education,
for example, the librarian author included readings on the topic of connection to the
land by Indigenous authors, including Leanne Betasamosake Simpson, for students
to read and discuss in SUST 201. In addition to written works and videos by Indige-
nous authors, students were able to beneﬁt from the strong relationship between
the university library and kihêw waciston Indigenous Student Centre through class
visits by nêhiyaw (Cree) educators. Language and land teachings connected to the
land were shared with students, which helped the students begin to understand the
value of local knowledge for guiding sustainability. Additionally, students to partic-
ipate in a blanket exercise, as well as a discussion on privilege led by a nêhiyaw
faculty member. Students also experienced additional introductory cultural teach-
ings by a nêhiyaw Elder and a nêhiyaw Knowledge Keeper. Introduction of these
living sources of nêhiyaw knowledge and participating in these experiences helped
students to better understand Indigenous cultures and knowledges and the value of
these for sustainability. These teachings and activities also helped to illustrate colo-
nial marginalization, assimilation and genocide in Canada and helped open students
to challenging conversations. They helped deepen student understanding of how
colonial practices separated and continue to separate all people from the land. These
are some examples of the ways that libraries, through their partnerships and attention
to inclusion and equity of information, as well community-building, can contribute
to sustainability research and education concerning the cultural pillar.
7
Conclusions
LIS research is contributing to, and has the potential to contribute to, the advance-
ment of sustainability education and research in several key areas. Firstly, the
growing ﬁeld of LIS research on sustainability presents opportunities for expan-
sion, particularly in the domains of education and culture. Secondly, investigations
into the structuring and integration of IL curriculum can provide valuable insights
for research into structuring and integration of sustainability curriculum. Similarly,
738
M. King
research into integration of sustainability content into IL instruction programs and
vice versa has been identiﬁed as a potential way to strengthen development of sustain-
able thinking. Thirdly, the parallels between IL and sustainability literacies under-
score the importance of LIS SoTL research for providing evidence of pedagog-
ical strategies for fostering sustainability competencies. Fourthly, studies exploring
information behavior, particularly concerning the dissemination and consumption
of climate and health information, stand to enrich sustainability research efforts
aimed at fostering awareness and shaping public attitudes. Finally, the exploration
of cultural dimensions within LIS research, such as the examination of academic
library collections documenting cultural knowledge, holds promise for advancing
our understanding of the cultural underpinnings of sustainability and for enhancing
sustainable development educational research and practice.
References
American Library Association (2024) Core values of librarianship. https://www.ala.org/advocacy/
advocacy/intfreedom/corevalues
Appleton L, Woolley N (2023) The role of academic libraries in climate action. New Rev Acad
Librariansh 29(2):117–122. https://doi.org/10.1080/13614533.2023.2230652
Association of College and Research Libraries (2015) Framework for information literacy
for higher education. http://acrl.ala.org/ilstandards/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/Framework-
MW15-Board-Docs.pdf
Bates R, Brenner B, Schmid E, Steiner G, Vogel S (2022) Towards meta-competences in higher
education for tackling complex real-world problems–a cross disciplinary review. Int J Sustain
High Educ 23(8):290–308. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-06-2021-0243
Blume R, Roylance A (2020) Decolonization in collection development: developing an authentic
authorship workﬂow. J Acad Librarianship 46(5). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acalib.2020.102175
Caulﬁeld T (2020) Does debunking work? correcting COVID-19 misinformation on social media.
In: Flood CM, MacDonnell V, Philpott J et al (eds) Vulnerable: the law, policy and ethics of
COVID-19. University of Ottawa Press, Canada, pp 183–200
Chowdhury G (2013) Sustainability of digital information services. J Doc 69(5):602–622. https://
doi.org/10.1108/JD-08-2012-0104
Colomer J, Serra T, Cañabate D, Bubnys R (2020) Reﬂective learning in higher education: active
methodologies for transformative practices. Sustainability 12(9), Article 3827. https://doi.org/
10.3390/su12093827
Connaway LS, Doyle B, Cyr C, Gallagher P, Cantrell J (2023) “Libraries model sustainability”: the
results of an OCLC survey on library contributions to the sustainable development goals. IFLA
J 49(2):269–285. https://doi.org/10.1177/03400352221141467
Cörvers R, Wiek A, de Kraker J, Lang DJ, Martens P (2016) Problem-based and project-based
learning for sustainable development. In: Heinrichs H, Martens P, Michelsen G, Wiek A (eds)
Sustainability science: an introduction. Springer Nature, Switzerland, pp 349–358. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-94-017-7242-6_29
Diekema AR, Holliday W, Leary H (2011) Re-framing information literacy: problem-based learning
as informed learning. Libr Inf Sci Res 33(4):261–268. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lisr.2011.02.002
Evans BM, Kairam S, Pirolli P (2010) Do your friends make you smarter?: an analysis of social
strategies in online information seeking. Inf Process Manag 46(6):679–692. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ipm.2009.12.001
Contributions of Academic Libraries, Librarians, and Information …
739
Fia M, Ghasemzadeh K, Paletta A (2023) How higher education institutions walk their talk on the
2030 Agenda: a systematic literature review. High Educ Policy 36:599–632. https://doi.org/10.
1057/s41307-022-00277-x
Howell RA (2021) Engaging students in education for sustainable development: the beneﬁts of
active learning, reﬂective practices and ﬂipped classroom pedagogies. J Clean Prod 325, Article
129318. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.129318
Hurley DA, Kostelecky SR, Aguilar P (2017) Whose knowledge? representing Indigenous realities
in library and archival collections. Collect Manag 42(3/4):124–129. https://doi.org/10.1080/014
62679.2017.1392805
International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA) (2002) Statement on
Libraries and Sustainable Development. IFLA, Glasgow. https://www.iﬂa.org/publications/sta
tement-on-libraries-and-sustainable-development-august-2002/
International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA) (2022) Statement: libraries
essential in providing evidence for sustainable development. https://www.iﬂa.org/news/librar
ies-essential-in-providing-evidence-for-sustainable-development/
Jacobs H (2008) Information literacy and reﬂective pedagogical praxis. J Acad Librariansh
34(3):256–262. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acalib.2008.03.009
Jankowska MA, Smith BJ, Buehler MA (2014) Engagement of academic libraries and informa-
tion science schools in creating curriculum for sustainability: an exploratory study. J Acad
Librarianship 40(1):45–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acalib.2013.10.013
Kamińska AM, Opaliński L, Wyciślik L (2022a) The landscapes of sustainability in the library
and information science: collaboration insights. Sustainability 14(24):16818. https://doi.org/10.
3390/su142416818
Kamińska AM, Opaliński L, Wyciślik L (2022b) The landscapes of sustainability in the library and
information science: systematic literature review. Sustainability 14(1):441. https://doi.org/10.
3390/su14010441
Khalid A, Malik GF, Mahmood K (2021) Sustainable development challenges in libraries: a system-
atic literature review (2000–2020). J Acad Librariansh 47(3):102347. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
acalib.2021.102347
Konrad T, Wiek A, Barth M (2021) Learning processes for interpersonal competence development
in project-based sustainability courses–insights from a comparative international study. Int J
Sustain High Educ 22(3):535–560. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSHE-07-2020-0231
Lozano R, Merrill M, Sammalisto K, Ceulemans K, Lozano F (2017) Connecting competences and
pedagogical approaches for sustainable development in higher education: a literature review and
framework proposal. Sustainability 9(10):1889–1904. https://doi.org/10.3390/su9101889
Mathiasson MH, Jochumsen H (2022) Libraries, sustainability and sustainable development: a
review of the research literature. J Doc 78(6):1278–1304. https://doi.org/10.1108/JD-11-2021-
0226
Meschede C, Henkel M (2019) Library and information science and sustainable development: a
structured literature review. J Doc 75(6):1356–1369. https://doi.org/10.1108/JD-02-2019-0021
Molderez I, Fonseca E (2018) The efﬁcacy of real-world experiences and service learning for
fostering competences for sustainable development in higher education. J Clean Prod 172:4397–
4410. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.04.062
Munro T, King M. (2022) Building capacity and awareness for the UN sustainable development
goals through project-based and community-engaged pedagogies. In: Conference proceedings
of the 1st international academic conference on the sustainable development goals. Utah Valley
University. https://www.uvu.edu/global/docs/wim22/sdg4/sdg4-king.pdf
Ranney MA, Velautham L (2021) Climate change cognition and education: given no silver bullet
for denial, diverse information-hunks increase global warming acceptance. Curr Opin Behav
Sci 42:139–146. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cobeha.2021.08.001
Redman A, Wiek A (2021) Competencies for advancing transformations towards sustainability.
Front Educ 6:1–11. https://doi.org/10.3389/feduc.2021.785163
740
M. King
Repanovici A, Rotaru CS, Murzea C (2021) Development of sustainable thinking by information
literacy. Sustainability 13(3):1287. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13031287
Sandri O (2022) What do we mean by “pedagogy” in sustainability education? Teach High Educ
27(1):114–129. https://doi.org/10.1080/13562517.2019.1699528
Savolainen R (2023) Assessing the credibility of COVID-19 vaccine mis/disinformation in online
discussion. J Inf Sci 49(4):1096–1110. https://doi.org/10.1177/01655515211040653
United Nations (2015) Transforming our world: the 2030 agenda for sustainable development.
United Nations. https://sdgs.un.org/2030agenda
Wang L (2011) An information literacy integration model and its application in higher education.
Ref Serv Rev 39(4):703–720. https://doi.org/10.1108/00907321111186703
World Health Organization (2022) Infodemic. World Health Organization. https://www.who.int/
health-topics/infodemic#tab=tab_1
Towards an Agenda for Sustainable
Development Research
Walter Leal Filho
Abstract This ﬁnal chapter serves as a call to action for the academic and research
communities to engage in impactful, interdisciplinary work that contributes to the
global sustainable development agenda. By aligning research efforts with the needs
of society and the planet, we can make signiﬁcant strides towards a more sustainable
and prosperous world.
Keywords Sustainable development · Research · Agenda · Interdisciplinarity ·
Collaboration
1
Introduction
The need for an agenda for sustainable development research is very conspicuous in
today’s world, where sustainability challenges are complex and multifaceted (Leal
Filho et al. 2018). This agenda should, among other things, guide research priorities
and investments towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) set
by the United Nations. This is because sustainable development encompasses a wide
array of sectors including environmental, economic, and social dimensions (Sousa
et al. 2021). An agenda would help in integrating research across these disciplines
to ensure holistic approaches, enabling solutions that consider the interconnections
between different sectors (Sousa et al. 2021; Stock and Burton 2011). Research
guided by a sustainable development agenda can provide the evidence base necessary
to inform and shape effective policies. This can help governments and organizations
implement strategies that are more aligned with the SDGs (Leal Filho et al. 2018;
Wu et al. 2024).
W. Leal Filho (B)
European School of Sustainability Science and Research (ESSSR), Research and Transfer Centre
“Sustainable Development and Climate Change Management”, Hamburg University of Applied
Sciences, Ulmenliet 20, 21033 Hamburg, Germany
e-mail: walter.leal2@haw-hamburg.de
Department of Natural Sciences, Manchester Metropolitan University, Chester Street,
Manchester M1 5GD, UK
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
W. Leal Filho et al. (eds.), An Agenda for Sustainable Development Research,
World Sustainability Series, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-65909-6_41
741
742
W. Leal Filho
Also, focused research can accelerate the development of innovative technologies
and solutions that are crucial for issues like renewable energy, waste management,
and water conservation (Al-Emran and Griffy-Brown 2023; Bradu et al. 2023). An
agenda would help prioritize research that has the potential for high impact in these
areas. An agenda can also promote the integration of sustainability concepts into
education systems at all levels, thereby increasing awareness and understanding of
sustainability issues among the general public and future generations (Cebrián et al.
2021; Confraria et al. 2024; Shava et al. 2023).
Research can lead to more efﬁcient use of resources, which is essential for sustain-
ability (Helbig et al. 2017). This includes improving agricultural practices, enhancing
energy efﬁciency, and promoting sustainable industrial practices (Helbig et al. 2017;
Paramati et al. 2022; Piñeiro et al. 2020; Tseng et al. 2021). Moreover, an agenda
can foster global research collaborations that pool resources, expertise, and data,
making it easier to tackle global challenges like climate change and biodiversity
loss. This collaborative approach is vital for achieving widespread and effective
solutions (McCormick et al. 2016).
An effective research agenda may also be useful in developing better tools for
monitoring progress towards sustainability goals and for reporting on these advance-
ments. This can help keep governments and organizations accountable and provide
clear data to guide further actions (de Albuquerque et al. 2021).
In summary, an Agenda for Sustainable Development Research not only focuses
on the immediate application of solutions but also fosters long-term strategic thinking
and planning necessary to navigate the complexities of sustainable development. It
acts as a roadmap that can guide researchers, policymakers, and businesses towards
the most effective and impactful areas of focus (Leal Filho et al. 2018; Pot et al.
2018; Secundo et al. 2020).
2
Addressing Barriers
Despite the positive trends, there are some barriers which prevent an agenda for
sustainable development research to be implemented. The ﬁrst one is in respect of
funding limitations (Clark et al. 2018). Sustainable development projects can be
expensive due to their scope and the technology required. Limited funding from
governments or private sectors can impede the initiation or continuation of research
(Clarketal.2018;Sergietal.2019).Also,inconsistenciesandtheslowpaceofchange
in governmental policies can create obstacles. Effective sustainable development
research often requires supportive legislation that may not be in place or aligned
across different regions (Ajulor 2018; Haque and Ntim 2018).
Moreover, sometimes, short-term economic gains are prioritized over long-term
sustainability goals (Haessler 2020; Teng et al. 2014). This focus can divert attention
and resources away from necessary sustainable development initiatives. There are
also technological barriers. The lack of advanced technology or technical expertise
Towards an Agenda for Sustainable Development Research
743
can limit the scope of research or its application in real-world scenarios, particu-
larly in developing countries (Adenle et al. 2019; Campuzano et al. 2023). But the
need for interdisciplinary collaboration may also be a barrier sometimes. Sustainable
development research often requires collaboration across various disciplines. Organ-
ising and maintaining such interdisciplinary cooperation can be challenging due to
differing terminologies, methodologies, or objectives (Freeth and Caniglia 2020).
There is also an issue related to cultural and social resistance. Changes proposed
by sustainable development research can sometimes conﬂict with existing cultural
norms or practices, leading to resistance from communities or stakeholders (Dali-
razar and Sabzi 2022; Lazar and Chithra 2022). Also, without adequate education
and awareness, it can be difﬁcult to gain public support for sustainable development
policies and practices, which are important for their success (Glavič 2020; Manolis
and Manoli 2021).
Addressingthesebarriersoftenrequirescoordinatedeffortsbetweengovernments,
businesses, academic institutions, and communities to create a supportive environ-
ment that encourages and facilitates sustainable development research (Florini and
Pauli 2018; Masuda et al. 2022).
3
The Way Forward
In terms of the future, if the world is to progress in pursuing an agenda for sustain-
able development research, action is needed in variety of fronts. The ﬁrst one is in
respect of policy and governance. Governments need to enact policies that promote
sustainable practices and create frameworks that encourage both private and public
sectors to invest in sustainable initiatives (Masuda et al. 2022; Quan et al. 2018).
This includes regulations that reduce carbon emissions, protect natural resources,
and incentivize renewable energy use (Balsalobre-Lorente et al. 2018; Hafner et al.
2022). Also, research and development in new technologies are crucial for sustain-
ability. This includes advancements in renewable energy sources like solar, wind,
and hydro power, as well as technologies that improve energy efﬁciency, water
puriﬁcation, and waste management (Nanda and Berruti 2021; Østergaard et al.
2020). Moreover, increasing public understanding of sustainability issues is vital.
Educational programs can help cultivate a culture of conservation and responsible
consumption. Schools, universities, and media can play signiﬁcant roles in dissem-
inating knowledge about environmental issues and sustainable practices (Cebrián
et al. 2020; Debrah et al. 2021).
Financial tools such as subsidies, grants, and tax incentives need to be more widely
available and be used to encourage businesses and consumers to adopt sustainable
practices. Additionally, investing in green infrastructure and sustainable urban plan-
ning can spur economic growth while also addressing environmental challenges
(Hanna and Comín 2021; Liu et al. 2023; Rana et al. 2021).
The global challenges require global solutions. International collaboration is
necessary to address issues like climate change, biodiversity loss, and pollution.
744
W. Leal Filho
Fig. 1 A framework to support sustainability research
This can include shared research initiatives, global environmental agreements, and
coordinated efforts in disaster response and resource management (Florini and Pauli
2018; Freeth and Caniglia 2020; McCormick et al. 2016).
Community engagement and social equity are equally important. Ensuring that
all community voices are heard in the development process is essential for equitable
sustainability (Krings and Schusler 2020; O’Neill 2020). This includes addressing
the needs of vulnerable populations and ensuring that the beneﬁts of sustainable
development are distributed fairly (Krings and Schusler 2020; Pineo 2022). Finally,
robust systems for monitoring progress and enforcing accountability are crucial. This
helps ensure that commitments to sustainability are kept, and provides data needed
to reﬁne approaches and scale successful practices (Ferreira et al. 2020). Figure 1
provides an overview of the key issues related to sustainability research.
By addressing these areas simultaneously, the global community can make signif-
icant progress toward sustainable development goals. Each area reinforces the others,
creating a comprehensive strategy for a more sustainable future (Freeth and Caniglia
2020; Zelenika and Pearce 2014).
4
Conclusions
As this book has shown, sustainable development is a holistic framework aimed
at balancing the needs of present and future generations through the integration of
economic, social, and environmental considerations.
Towards an Agenda for Sustainable Development Research
745
The creation of an agenda for sustainable development research involves estab-
lishing a set of priorities and a roadmap that can guide scholarly and practical efforts
towards sustainability goals. It may encourage collaboration across disciplines to
address complex sustainability issues that span social, economic, and environmental
domains.
It may also support the development of robust methodologies for conducting
research, including quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods approaches. But
despite the importance of and the need for an agenda for sustainable development
research, many efforts are isolated and thematically disconnected. Also, it is difﬁcult
to ﬁnd information on how sustainability research is being undertaken, and on the
wide range of methods being used.
As the global community tries to address the many challenges such as climate
change, biodiversity loss, and social inequality, among others, the need for robust,
interdisciplinary research agendas has never been more pressing. Establishing plat-
forms and networks that facilitate collaboration among researchers, policy-makers,
and practitioners, such as:
(a) European School of Science and Sustainability Research (ESSSR) https://ess
sr.eu/
(b) UK Consortium on Sustainability Research (UK-CSR) https://www.mmu.ac.
uk/research/research-centres/ecology-environment/groups/zero-carbon-sustai
nable-futures/UK-CSR
(c) Inter-University Sustainable Development Research Programme (IUSDRP)
https://www.haw-hamburg.de/en/ftz-nk/programmes/iusdrp/
(d) TheEuropean-NorthAmericanSustainabilityResearchConsortium(ENASRC)
https://www.haw-hamburg.de/en/ftz-nk/programmes/translate-to-english-eur
opean-north-american-sustainability-research-consortium/.
May foster transnational research, that can be directly translated into policies and
practices. This involves close collaboration with stakeholders to ensure the relevance
and applicability of research ﬁndings.
References
Adenle AA, Wedig K, Azadi H (2019) Sustainable agriculture and food security in Africa: the role
of innovative technologies and international organizations. Technol Soc 58:101143. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2019.05.007
Ajulor OV (2018) The challenges of policy implementation in Africa and sustainable development
goals. Int J Soc Sci 3(3):1497–1518. https://doi.org/10.20319/pijss.2018.33.14971518
Al-Emran M, Griffy-Brown C (2023) The role of technology adoption in sustainable development:
overview, opportunities, challenges, and future research agendas. Technol Soc 102240. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.techsoc.2023.102240
Balsalobre-Lorente D, Shahbaz M, Roubaud D, Farhani S (2018) How economic growth, renewable
electricity and natural resources contribute to CO2 emissions? Energy Policy 113:356–367.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2017.10.050
746
W. Leal Filho
Bradu P, Biswas A, Nair C, Sreevalsakumar S, Patil M, Kannampuzha S, Mukherjee AG, Wanjari
UR, Renu K, Vellingiri B (2023) Recent advances in green technology and Industrial Revolution
4.0 for a sustainable future. Environ Sci Pollut Res 30(60):124488–124519. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s11356-022-20024-4
Campuzano LR, Hincapié Llanos GA, Zartha Sossa JW, Orozco Mendoza GL, Palacio JC, Herrera
M (2023) Barriers to the adoption of innovations for sustainable development in the agricultural
sector—systematic literature review (SLR). Sustainability 15(5):4374. https://doi.org/10.3390/
su15054374
Cebrián G, Junyent M, Mulà I (2020) Competencies in education for sustainable development:
emerging teaching and research developments. In: vol 12. MDPI, pp 579
Cebrián G, Junyent M, Mulà I (2021) Current practices and future pathways towards competencies
in education for sustainable development. In: vol 13. MDPI, pp 8733
Clark R, Reed J, Sunderland T (2018) Bridging funding gaps for climate and sustainable develop-
ment: pitfalls, progress and potential of private ﬁnance. Land Use Policy 71:335–346. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2017.12.013
Confraria H, Ciarli T, Noyons E (2024) Countries’ research priorities in relation to the sustainable
development goals. Res Policy 53(3):104950. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2023.104950
Dalirazar S, Sabzi Z (2022) Barriers to sustainable development: Critical social factors inﬂuencing
the sustainable building development based on Swedish experts’ perspectives. Sustain Dev
30(6):1963–1974. https://doi.org/10.1002/sd.2362
de Albuquerque JP, Anderson L, Calvillo N, Coaffee J, Cunha MA, Degrossi LC, Dolif G, Horita F,
Klonner C, Lima-Silva F (2021) The role of data in transformations to sustainability: a critical
research agenda. Curr Opin Environ Sustain 49:153–163. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2021.
06.009
Debrah JK, Vidal DG, Dinis MAP (2021) Raising awareness on solid waste management through
formal education for sustainability: a developing countries evidence review. Recycling 6(1):6.
https://doi.org/10.3390/recycling6010006
Ferreira B, Iten M, Silva RG (2020) Monitoring sustainable development by means of earth obser-
vation data and machine learning: a review. Environ Sci Eur 32(1):1–17. https://doi.org/10.1186/
s12302-020-00397-4
Florini A, Pauli M (2018) Collaborative governance for the sustainable development goals. Asia
the Pac Policy Stud 5(3):583–598. https://doi.org/10.1002/app5.252Cita
Freeth R, Caniglia G (2020) Learning to collaborate while collaborating: advancing interdisci-
plinary sustainability research. Sustain Sci 15(1):247–261. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-019-
00701-z
Glavič P (2020) Identifying key issues of education for sustainable development. Sustainability
12(16):6500. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12166500
Haessler P (2020) Strategic decisions between short-term proﬁt and sustainability. Adm Sci
10(3):63. https://doi.org/10.3390/admsci10030063
Hafner S, Speich M, Bischofberger P, Ulli-Beer S (2022) Governing industry decarbonisation:
Policy implications from a ﬁrm perspective. J Clean Prod 375:133884. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jclepro.2022.133884
Hanna E, Comín FA (2021) Urban green infrastructure and sustainable development: a review.
Sustainability 13(20):11498. https://doi.org/10.3390/su132011498
Haque F, Ntim CG (2018) Environmental policy, sustainable development, governance mechanisms
and environmental performance. Bus Strateg Environ 27(3):415–435. https://doi.org/10.1002/
bse.2007
Helbig C, Kolotzek C, Thorenz A, Reller A, Tuma A, Schafnitzel M, Krohns S (2017) Beneﬁts of
resource strategy for sustainable materials research and development. Sustain Mater Technol
12:1–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.susmat.2017.01.004
Krings A, Schusler TM (2020) Equity in sustainable development: Community responses to
environmental gentriﬁcation. Int J Soc Welf 29(4):321–334. https://doi.org/10.1111/ijsw.12425
Towards an Agenda for Sustainable Development Research
747
Lazar N, Chithra K (2022) Role of culture in sustainable development and sustainable built envi-
ronment: a review. Environ Dev Sustain 24(5):5991–6031. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10668-021-
01691-8
Leal Filho W, Azeiteiro U, Alves F, Pace P, Mifsud M, Brandli L, Caeiro SS, Disterheft A (2018)
Reinvigorating the sustainable development research agenda: the role of the sustainable devel-
opment goals (SDG). Int J Sust Dev World 25(2):131–142. https://doi.org/10.1080/13504509.
2017.1342103
Liu Z, Yu C, Qian QK, Huang R, You K, Visscher H, Zhang G (2023) Incentive initiatives on
energy-efﬁcient renovation of existing buildings towards carbon-neutral blueprints in China:
advancements, challenges and perspectives. Energy Build 113343. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enbuild.2023.113343
Manolis EN, Manoli EN (2021) Raising awareness of the sustainable development goals through
ecological projects in higher education. J Clean Prod 279:123614. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcl
epro.2020.123614
Masuda H, Kawakubo S, Okitasari M, Morita K (2022) Exploring the role of local governments
as intermediaries to facilitate partnerships for the sustainable development goals. Sustain Cities
Soc 82:103883. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2022.103883
McCormick K, Neij L, Mont O, Ryan C, Rodhe H, Orsato R (2016) Advancing sustainable solutions:
an interdisciplinary and collaborative research agenda. In: vol 123. Elsevier, pp 1–4
Nanda S, Berruti F (2021) Municipal solid waste management and landﬁlling technologies: a review.
Environ Chem Lett 19(2):1433–1456. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10311-020-01100-y
O’Neill M (2020) Increasing community engagement in collective impact approaches to advance
social change. Community Dev 51(1):17–35. https://doi.org/10.1080/15575330.2020.1714684
Østergaard PA, Duic N, Noorollahi Y, Mikulcic H, Kalogirou S (2020) Sustainable development
using renewable energy technology. In: vol 146. Elsevier, pp 2430–2437
Paramati SR, Shahzad U, Doğan B (2022) The role of environmental technology for energy demand
and energy efﬁciency: evidence from OECD countries. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 153:111735.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2021.111735
Piñeiro V, Arias J, Dürr J, Elverdin P, Ibáñez AM, Kinengyere A, Opazo CM, Owoo N, Page
JR, Prager SD (2020) A scoping review on incentives for adoption of sustainable agricultural
practices and their outcomes. Nat Sustain 3(10):809–820. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-020-
00617-y
Pineo H (2022) Towards healthy urbanism: inclusive, equitable and sustainable (THRIVES)–an
urban design and planning framework from theory to praxis. Cities Health 6(5):974–992. https://
doi.org/10.1080/23748834.2020.1769527
Pot AM, Briggs AM, Beard JR (2018) The sustainable development agenda needs to include long-
term care. J Am Med Dir Assoc 19(9):725–727. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jamda.2018.04.009
Quan Y, Wu H, Li S, Ying SX (2018) Firm sustainable development and stakeholder engagement:
The role of government support. Bus Strateg Environ 27(8):1145–1158. https://doi.org/10.1002/
bse.2057
Rana A, Sadiq R, Alam MS, Karunathilake H, Hewage K (2021) Evaluation of ﬁnancial incentives
for green buildings in Canadian landscape. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 135:110199. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.rser.2020.110199
Secundo G, Ndou V, Del Vecchio P, De Pascale G (2020) Sustainable development, intellec-
tual capital and technology policies: a structured literature review and future research agenda.
Technol Forecast Soc Chang 153:119917. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.119917
Sergi BS, Popkova EG, Borzenko KV, Przhedetskaya NV (2019) Public–private partnerships as a
mechanism of ﬁnancing sustainable development. Financ Sustain Dev Key Challenges Prospects
313–339. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-16522-2_13
Shava GN, Mkwelie N, Ndlovu MJ, Zulu E (2023) Higher education institutions’ sustainable devel-
opment towards agenda 2030: a global goals in policy and curriculum. Int J Res Innovat Soc
Sci 7(4):1320–1336. https://doi.org/10.47772/IJRISS.2023.7510
748
W. Leal Filho
Sousa M, Almeida MF, Calili R (2021) Multiple criteria decision making for the achievement of
the UN sustainable development goals: a systematic literature review and a research agenda.
Sustainability 13(8):4129. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13084129
Stock P, Burton RJ (2011) Deﬁning terms for integrated (multi-inter-trans-disciplinary) sustain-
ability research. Sustainability 3(8):1090–1113. https://doi.org/10.3390/su3081090
Teng MJ, Wu SY, Chou SJH (2014) Environmental commitment and economic performance–short-
term pain for long-term gain. Environ Policy Gov 24(1):16–27. https://doi.org/10.1002/eet.
1634
Tseng M-L, Tran TPT, Ha HM, Bui T-D, Lim MK (2021) Sustainable industrial and operation
engineering trends and challenges Toward Industry 4.0: A data driven analysis. J Ind Prod Eng
38(8):581–598. https://doi.org/10.1080/21681015.2021.1950227
Wu M, Lv G, Qiao L, Roth RE, Zhu A-X (2024) Green cartography: a research agenda towards
sustainable development. Annf GIS 1-20. https://doi.org/10.1080/19475683.2024.2305321
Zelenika I, Pearce JM (2014) Innovation through collaboration: scaling up solutions for sustainable
development. Environ Dev Sustain 16:1299–1316. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10668-014-9528-7
